RULE 1 THE FIELD
SECTION 1 DIMENSIONS
ARTICLE 1. PLAYING LINES. The game shall be played upon a rectangular field, 360 feet in length and 160 feet in width. The
lines at each end of the field are termed end lines. Those on each side are termed sidelines. Goal lines shall be established in the
field 10 yards from and parallel to each end line. The area bounded by goal lines and sidelines is known as the field of play. The
surface of the entire field of play must be a League-approved shade of green. The areas bounded by goal lines, end lines, and
sidelines are known as the end zones.
The areas bounded by goal lines and lines parallel to, and 70 feet 9 inches inbounds, from each sideline, are known as the side
zones. The lines parallel to sidelines are termed inbounds lines. The end lines and the sidelines are also termed boundary lines.
ARTICLE 2. FIELD.
The field includes the field of play and the end zones. The field will be rimmed by a solid white border a minimum of 6 feet wide
along the end lines and sidelines. An additional broken limit line 6 feet further outside this border is to encompass the field in the
non-bench areas, and such broken line will be continued at an angle from each 25-yard line and pass behind the bench areas (all
benches a minimum 30 feet back from the sidelines). In addition, within each bench area, a yellow line 6 feet behind the solid white
border will delineate a special area for coaches, behind which all players, except one player charting the game, must remain. If a
club’s solid white border is a minimum of 12 feet wide, there is no requirement that the broken restraining line also be added in the
non-bench areas. However, the appropriate yellow line described above must be clearly marked within the bench areas.
In special circumstances (for example, an artificial surface in a multi-purpose stadium) and subject to prior approval from the League
Office, a club may omit the 6-foot solid white border during the preseason or later period while football overlaps with another sport,
and substitute a single 4-inch white line at what normally would be the outer limit of the solid border (6 feet from the sidelines).
SECTION 2 MARKINGS
ARTICLE 1. YARD LINE MARKINGS. At intervals of 5 yards, yard line markings parallel to the goal lines shall be marked in the
field of play. These lines are to stop 8 inches short of the 6-foot solid border. Yard line markings shall measure 4-inches wide, and
are to be extended 4 inches beyond the white 6-foot border along the sidelines.
ARTICLE 2. INBOUNDS LINES AND YARD MARKERS.
Item 1. Inbounds Lines. The inbounds lines are hash marks on the field of play that are 70 feet, 9 inches from and parallel to each
sideline and intersect each yard line marking at right angles.
Item 2. Yard Markers. In line with the inbounds lines there shall be hash marks at 1-yard intervals between each distance of 5 yards
for the full length of the field. There shall be corresponding hash marks at 1-yard intervals on each side of the field that are to begin
8 inches from the 6-foot solid border and are to measure 2 feet in length.
ARTICLE 3. GOAL LINE. All measurements are to be made from the inside edges of the line marking the boundary lines. Each
goal line marking is to be in its end zone so that the edge of the line toward the field of play (actual goal line) is 30 feet from the
inside edge of the end line. Each goal line is to be 8 inches wide.
The four intersections of goal lines and sidelines must be marked, at inside corners, by weighted pylons. In addition, two such pylons
shall be placed on each end line (four in all).
ARTICLE 4. ADDITIONAL FIELD MARKINGS AND REQUIREMENTS.
Item 1. Field Numerals. Bottoms of numbers indicating yard lines in multiples of 10 must be placed beginning 12 yards in from
each sideline. Each numeral must be in white and measure 2 yards in length.
Item 2. Other Requirements. Two yards from the middle of each goal line and parallel to it, there shall be marked in the field of
play, lines 1 yard in length.
All boundary lines, goal lines, and line markings are to be continuous lines. These, and any other specified markings, must be in
white, and there shall be no exceptions without the authorization of the Commissioner.
Care must be exercised in any end zone marking or decoration or club identification at the 50-yard line that said marking or
decorations do not in any way cause confusion as to delineation of goal lines, sidelines, end lines, or other field markings. Such
markings or decorations must be approved by the Commissioner.
All lines are to be marked with a material that is not injurious to eyes or skin. It is desirable that the yard line markers be flexible in
order to prevent injury. No benches or rigid fixtures should be nearer than 30 feet from sidelines.
SECTION 3 GOAL
ARTICLE 1. CROSSBAR. In the plane of each end line, there shall be a centrally placed horizontal crossbar 18 feet, 6 inches in
length, the top face of which is 10 feet above the ground. The goal is the vertical plane extending indefinitely above the crossbar
and between the lines indicated by the outer edges of the goal posts.
ARTICLE 2. GOAL POSTS. All goal posts will be the single-standard type, offset from the end line, bright gold in color, and padded
in a manner prescribed by the League. The uprights will extend 35 feet above the crossbar and will be no less than 3 inches and no
more than 4 inches in diameter. An orange-colored ribbon 4 inches by 42 inches is to be attached to the top of each post.
SECTION 4 CHAIN CREW AND BALL CREW
Members of the chain crew and the ball crew must be uniformly identifiable as specified by the Commissioner. White shirts are to be
worn by members of the chain crew. It is the responsibility of each team to furnish playable balls at all times by members of the ball
crew from either side of the playing field.
SECTION 5 SIDELINE MARKERS
The home club must provide and use the standard set of sideline markers that have been approved by the Commissioner.