RULE 3 DEFINITIONS
SECTION 1 APPROVED RULING (A.R.)
An Approved Ruling (A.R.) is a written decision on a given statement of facts and serves to illustrate the intent and application of
a rule. Supplemental Notes are used to amplify a rule. A Note is more specific and applies to a particular situation. It is also used
to indicate pertinent references to other rules.
An Official Ruling (O.R.) is a ruling made in the interim between the annual rules meetings and is official only during the current
season.
SECTION 2 THE BALL AND POSSESSION OF THE BALL
ARTICLE 1. DEAD BALL. A dead ball is one that is not in play. The time period during which the ball is dead is between downs.
This includes the interval during all timeouts, including intermission, and from the time the ball becomes dead until it is legally put
in play.
ARTICLE 2. BALL READY FOR PLAY. A dead ball is ready for play while the 40-second play clock is running when the ball is
placed down by an official at the spot where the ball will next be put in play, or when the Referee signals for the 25-second play
clock to start.
ARTICLE 3. LIVE BALL. A live ball is a ball that is in play. A dead ball becomes a live ball when it is:
(a) legally kicked on a free kick down (6-1-1; 6-1-3; 6-1-6);
(b) legally snapped on a scrimmage down (7-1-1; 7-6-1); or
(c) legally kicked on a fair catch kick down (10-2-4;11-4-3).
It continues in play until the down ends (3-8-1).
ARTICLE 4. LOOSE BALL. A loose ball is a live ball that is not in player possession, i.e., any ball that has been kicked, passed,
or fumbled. A loose ball is considered to be in possession of the team (offense) whose player kicked, passed, or fumbled it. It is a
loose ball until a player secures possession or until the ball becomes dead. If it has not yet struck the ground, a loose ball is in
flight.
ARTICLE 5. FUMBLE. A fumble is any act, other than passing, successful handing, or legally kicking the ball, which results in a
loss of player possession. It is not a fumble if the player immediately regains control of the ball. A fumble ends when a player of
either team possesses the ball, or when the ball is dead. The use of the term fumble always means that the ball was in possession
of a player when the act occurred (8-7-3).
Note: An intentional fumble that causes the ball to go forward is a forward pass and may be illegal (8-1-1-Pen. a–c).
ARTICLE 6. MUFF. A muff is the touching of a loose ball by a player in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain possession of it.
Note: Any ball intentionally muffed forward is a bat and may be a foul (3-3; 12-5-1; 3-14).
Touching the ball refers to any contact with the ball. There is no distinction between a player touching the ball with his hands, or
with any other part of his body, including his hair, except as specifically provided for (9-2-2).
(a) See 6-1-4, 6-1-6 and 6-2-5 for touching a free kick.
(b) See 6-2-4 for touching a free kick before it goes out of bounds between the goal lines or in advance of the front yard line of
the landing zone.
(c) See 8-1-8 for ineligible offensive player touching a forward pass on, behind, or beyond the line.
(d) See 9-2-1, 9-3-1 for touching a scrimmage kick on or behind the line, and 9-2-4 for being pushed into a kick by an opponent.
(e) See 11-4-2 for touching a kick during an attempted field goal.
(f) Simultaneous touching by two opponents in an attempt to establish possession of a ball that has been kicked is treated as a
first touch by the kicking team.
ARTICLE 7. PLAYER POSSESSION.
A player is in possession when he is inbounds and has control of the ball with his hands or arms.
To gain possession of a loose ball that has been caught, intercepted, or recovered, a player (a) must have complete control of the
ball with his hands or arms and (b) have both feet or any other part of his body, other than his hands, completely on the ground
inbounds, and, after (a) and (b) have been fulfilled, clearly perform any act common to the game (e.g., extend the ball forward,
take an additional step, tuck the ball away and turn upfield, or avoid or ward off an opponent). It is not necessary that he commit
such an act, provided that he maintains control of the ball long enough to do so. This rule applies in the field of play, at the sideline,
and in the end zone.
Notes:
(1) Movement of the ball does not automatically result in loss of control.
(2) If a player who has completed the first two, but not the third requirement for possession, contacts the ground and loses
control of the ball, there is no possession if the ball hits the ground before he regains control, or if he regains control out
of bounds. If a player would have caught, intercepted, or recovered a ball inbounds, but is carried out of bounds, player
possession will be granted (8-1-3-Note 5).
(3) If any part of the foot hits out of bounds during the normal continuous motion of taking a step (heel-toe or toe-heel), then
the foot is out of bounds. A player is inbounds if he drags his foot, or if there is a delay between the heel-toe or toe-heel
touching the ground.
The terms catch, intercept, recover, advance, and fumble denote player possession (as distinguished from touching or muffing).
A catch is made when a player inbounds secures possession of a pass, kick, or fumble that is in flight. An interception is made
when an opponent who is inbounds catches a forward or backward pass or a fumble that has not touched the ground.
Notes:
(1) It is a catch, or an interception, if, in the process of attempting to possess the ball, a player secures control of the ball
prior to it touching the ground, and that control is maintained during and after the ball has touched the ground.
(2) In the field of play, if a catch or interception has been completed, and the ball comes loose before the player is down by
contact, it is a fumble, and the ball remains alive. It is also a fumble if the action occurs in the end zone of the player who
caught the loose ball. If the action occurs in the opponent’s end zone, it is a touchdown or a touchback.
A recovery is made when a player inbounds secures possession of a loose ball after it has touched the ground.
If a loose ball is controlled simultaneously by two opponents, and both players retain it, it is simultaneous possession, and the ball
belongs to the team last in possession, or to the receiving team when there has been a free kick, scrimmage kick, or fair catch
kick. It is not simultaneous possession if a player gains control first and an opponent subsequently gains joint control.
SECTION 3 BAT
A bat is the intentional striking of the ball with any part of the hand or arm. See 12-5-1.
SECTION 4 BLOCKING
Blocking is the act of obstructing or impeding an opponent by contacting him with a part of the blocker’s body.
A block in the back is a block that is delivered from behind an opponent above his waist. It is not a block in the back:
(a) if a player is making a personal attempt to recover a loose ball;
(b) if the opponent turns away from the blocker when contact is imminent; or
(c) if both of the blocker’s hands are on the opponent’s side.
A block below the waist is when the initial contact with any part of the blocker’s body is below the waist of an opponent, other than
the runner, who has one or both feet on the ground. A blocker who makes contact above the waist and then slides below the waist
has not blocked below the waist. If an opponent uses his hands to ward off a block creating contact below the waist, it is not a
block below the waist.
SECTION 5 CHUCKING
Chucking is intentionally contacting an eligible receiver who is in front of a defender.
SECTION 6 CLOSE-LINE PLAY
Close-line play is contact that occurs in an area extending between the outside edges of the normal tackle positions and three
yards on either side of the line of scrimmage. Close-line play no longer exists after the ball leaves that area.
SECTION 7 DISQUALIFIED PLAYER
A disqualified player is one who is prohibited from further participation in the game. He must return to his dressing room within a
reasonable period of time and is not permitted to reappear in his team uniform or return to any area other than to which spectators
have access.
SECTION 8 DOWN
ARTICLE 1. DOWN. A down is a period of action that starts when the ball is put in play (3-2-3) and ends when the ball is declared
dead (7-2-1).
A down that starts with a snap is a scrimmage down (3-29).
A down that starts with a free kick is a free kick down (6-1-1).
A down that starts with a fair catch kick is a fair catch kick down (10-2-4; 11-4-3).
ARTICLE 2. SERIES OF DOWNS. A series of downs is the four consecutive charged scrimmage downs allotted to the offensive
team during which it must advance the ball to a yard line called “the line to gain” in order to retain possession.
ARTICLE 3. LINE TO GAIN. The line to gain is the spot 10 yards in advance of the spot of the snap that starts a series, except
when a goal line is less than 10 yards from this spot. In that case, the line to gain is the goal line.
ARTICLE 4. CHARGED DOWN. A charged down is a scrimmage down that is not nullified by a penalty, or during which there is
not a change of possession. It counts as a down in a series of downs.
ARTICLE 5. FIRST DOWN. The initial down in each series is the first down. If it is a charged down, subsequent charged downs
are numbered consecutively (i.e., second down, third down, or fourth down) until a new series is declared for either team (7-3).
SECTION 9 FAIR CATCH
A fair catch is an unhindered catch of a scrimmage kick that has crossed the line of scrimmage and has not touched the ground
or of a free kick that has not touched the ground, by a player of the receiving team who has given a valid fair catch signal. A fair
catch may be followed by a fair catch kick (See 10-2-4 and 11-4-3).
SECTION 10 FIELD GOAL
A field goal is made by kicking the ball from the field of play through the plane of the opponent’s goal, which is an area either
between the goal posts and above the crossbar, or, if above the goal posts, between the outside edges of the goal posts. A field
Rule 3
4
goal is made by a drop kick or a place kick from (a) on or behind the line on a play from scrimmage or (b) during a fair catch kick
(See 3-17-1-Item 1-2; 10-2-4; and 11-4-3).
SECTION 11 THE FIELD
ARTICLE 1. BOUNDARY LINES. The boundary lines are the end lines and the sidelines and enclose the field upon which the
game is played.
ARTICLE 2. END LINES. The end lines are the lines at each end of the field and are perpendicular to the sidelines. The end line
is 10 yards from the goal line and at the back of the end zone.
ARTICLE 3. END ZONE. The end zone is the rectangle formed by the goal line, the end line, and the sidelines. The goal line and
the pylons are in the end zone.
ARTICLE 4. FIELD OF PLAY. The field of play is the rectangle formed by the goal lines and the sidelines. It does not include the
end zone.
ARTICLE 5. GOAL. The goal is the area above the crossbar between the uprights, or, if above the uprights, the area between
the outside edges of the uprights. A team’s own goal is the one it is defending. The adjacent goal line is known as its goal line.
ARTICLE 6. GOAL LINES. The goal lines are the lines between the sidelines that separate the end zone from the field of play.
The goal lines are vertical planes that are parallel to and 10 yards from the end lines.
ARTICLE 7. INBOUNDS LINES. The inbounds lines are hash marks on the field of play that are 70 feet, 9 inches from and
parallel to each sideline and intersect each yard line marking at right angles.
ARTICLE 8. SIDELINES. The sidelines are the lines on each side of the field and are perpendicular to the end lines. The sidelines
separate the field of play from the area that is out of bounds.
ARTICLE 9. YARD LINE. A yard line is any line and its vertical plane parallel to the end line. The yard lines (marked or unmarked)
in the field of play are named by number in yards from a team’s goal line to the center of the field. By way of example, the yard
line 19 yards from Team A’s goal line is called A’s 19-yard line. The yard line 51 yards from A’s goal line is called B’s 49-yard line.
For brevity, these are referred to as A’s 19 and B’s 49 or A19 and B49.
SECTION 12 FORWARD PROGRESS
ARTICLE 1. FORWARD PROGRESS. The forward progress of a runner or airborne receiver is the point at which his advance
toward his opponent’s goal ends and is the spot at which the ball is declared dead by rule, irrespective of the runner or receiver
being pushed or carried backward by an opponent.
ARTICLE 2. FORWARD, BEYOND, OR IN ADVANCE. Forward, beyond, or in advance of are terms that designate a point nearer
the goal line of the defense. Backward or behind designate a point nearer the goal line of the offense. A pass parallel to a yard
line, or an offensive player moving parallel to it at the snap, is considered backward.
SECTION 13 FOULS AND SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION
ARTICLE 1. TYPES OF FOULS. A foul is any infraction of a playing rule for which a penalty is prescribed.
(a) A live ball foul is a foul that occurs during the period after the snap until the ball is dead.
(b) A dead ball foul is a foul that occurs in the continuing action after a down ends, or a taunting foul that occurs at any time.
(c) A foul between downs is a foul that occurs after the end of the down and after any continuing action resulting from the down,
but prior to the next snap or free kick.
(d) A multiple foul is one of two or more fouls by the same team during the same down (14-1-3), including dead ball fouls.
(e) A double foul is a foul by either team during the same down during which both teams commit at least one foul, including dead
ball fouls.
ARTICLE 2. BASIC SPOT. The basic spot is a reference point for specific types of plays that is used to determine the spot of
enforcement.
ARTICLE 3. SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT. The spot of enforcement is the spot at which a penalty is enforced. The spots of
enforcement are as follows:
(a) The previous spot: The spot at which the ball was last put in play.
(b) The spot of the foul: The spot at which a foul was committed or, by rule, is considered to have been committed.
(c) The spot of a backward pass or a fumble: The spot at which the backward pass or fumble occurred during the down in which
there was a foul.
(d) The dead ball spot: The spot at which the ball became dead.
(e) The succeeding spot: The spot at which the ball will next be put in play (i.e., the spot of the ball after enforcement for a foul,
or, if there has been no foul, the spot at which the ball became dead).
(f) The other Try spot. The yard line of the other Try option, as determined by any previously enforced penalties, if applicable.
(g) The spot of a change of possession: The spot at which possession is gained by or awarded to the opponent.
ARTICLE 4. VIOLATION. A violation is an infraction of a playing rule for which a penalty is not prescribed. A violation does not
offset a foul.
SECTION 14 HANDING THE BALL
Handing the ball is transferring player possession from one teammate to another without passing or kicking it.
(a) Except where permitted by rule, handing the ball forward to a teammate is illegal.
(b) Loss of player possession by unsuccessful execution of attempted handing is a fumble charged to the player that last had
possession. A muffed handoff (legal or illegal) is a fumble, unless either player immediately regains control of the ball, and
the ball remains alive.
(c) A forward handoff occurs when the ball is handed (regardless of the direction of the movement of the ball) to a player who is
in advance of a teammate from whose hands he takes or receives it.
SECTION 15 HUDDLE
A huddle is the action of two or more players in the field of play or in the end zone who, instead of assuming their normal position
for the snap, free kick, or fair catch kick, form a group for receiving instructions for the next play or for any other reason.
SECTION 16 IMPETUS
Impetus is the action of a player who carries the ball or provides the force (i.e., a pass, kick, snap, or fumble) that causes a ball in
the field of play to touch or cross a goal line. If a loose ball touches or crosses a goal line, the impetus is attributed to the team
whose player passed, kicked, snapped, or fumbled the ball, unless an opponent:
(a) muffs a ball that is at rest, or nearly at rest;
(b) bats a ball that has been kicked or fumbled;
(c) bats a backward pass after it has struck the ground; or
(d) illegally kicks any ball (see 12-5-2).
Note:
(1) A loose ball retains its original status (as a pass, kick, fumble, etc.) even if a new impetus is added.
(2) The impetus is always attributed to the offense, unless the defense creates a new force that sends the ball behind its
own goal line by muffing a ball which is at rest or nearly at rest, or by batting a loose ball on the ground or kicking any
loose ball.
(3) If a passive player is pushed or blocked into any kicked or fumbled ball or into a backward pass after it has struck the
ground, causing the loose ball to touch a goal line or anything on or behind a goal line, the impetus is attributed to the
pusher or blocker, provided that the pushed (blocked) player was not making an attempt to block an opponent.
SECTION 17 KICKS
ARTICLE 1. KICK. A kick is intentionally striking the ball with the knee, lower leg, or foot. A kick ends when a player of either
team possesses the ball, or when the ball is dead.
Item 1. Drop Kick. A drop kick is a kick by a player who drops the ball and kicks it as, or immediately after, it touches the ground.
Item 2. Place kick. A place kick is a kick made by a player while the ball is in a fixed position on the ground. The ball may be held
in position by a teammate. If it is a free kick, it is permissible to use an approved manufactured tee.
Item 3. Punt. A punt is a kick made by a player who drops the ball and kicks it before it strikes the ground.
ARTICLE 2. KICKER. A kicker is the player of Team A who legally drop kicks, place kicks, or punts the ball. Team A is identified
as the kickers during a down in which there is a scrimmage kick, free kick, or fair catch kick.
ARTICLE 3. RECEIVER. A receiver is any Team B player during a down in which there is a scrimmage kick, free kick, or fair
catch kick. Team B is identified as the receiving team during the entire down.
ARTICLE 4. FAIR CATCH KICK. A fair catch kick is a drop kick or place kick without a tee from the spot of a fair catch in an
attempt to score a field goal.
ARTICLE 5. FREE KICK. A free kick is a kickoff, safety kick, or onside kick that puts the ball in play to start a free kick down.
Item 1. Kickoff. A kickoff is a kick that puts the ball in play at the start of each half, at the start of overtime, after a try, and after a
successful field goal.
Item 2. Safety Kick. A safety kick is a kick that puts the ball in play after a safety.
Item 3. Onside Kick. An onside kick is a free kick that the kicking team attempts to legally recover from the kicking team’s
restraining line to the furthest point downfield within the onside kick setup zone.
ARTICLE 6. RESTRAINING LINES. The restraining lines are lines which restrict the alignment of the kicking and receiving teams
during a free kick and fair catch kick.
ARTICLE 7. SCRIMMAGE KICK. A scrimmage kick is a punt, drop kick, or place kick from on or behind the line of scrimmage.
Item 1. Scrimmage Kick Formation. A scrimmage kick formation is a formation with no player in position to receive a hand-tohand
snap and;
(a) Punt formation: at least one player 10 or more yards behind the neutral zone; or
(b) Field Goal or Try Kick formation: a potential holder and potential kicker seven or more yards behind the neutral zone in position
for a place kick.
For either (a) or (b) to qualify as a scrimmage kick formation, it must be obvious that a kick may be attempted. If Team A is in a
scrimmage kick formation at the snap, any action by Team A during the down is deemed to be from a scrimmage kick formation.
ARTICLE 8. TEE. A tee is an approved device that is used to elevate the ball for a place kick during any free kick.
SECTION 18 LINE OF SCRIMMAGE, NEUTRAL ZONE
ARTICLE 1. SCRIMMAGE LINE. The line of scrimmage is the vertical plane of the yard line that passes through the forward point
of the ball after it has been made ready for play. The term scrimmage line, or line, implies a play from scrimmage.
ARTICLE 2. NEUTRAL ZONE. The neutral zone is the space between the forward and backward points of the ball (planes) and
extends to the sidelines. It starts when the ball is ready for play (See neutral zone infraction, 7-4-4).
ARTICLE 3. PLAYER ON LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. A player of Team A, who is on the line of scrimmage, must have his shoulders
facing Team B’s goal line.
Item 1. Non-Snapper. If he is not the snapper, no part of his body is permitted to be in the neutral zone at the snap, and his
helmet must break a vertical plane that passes through the beltline of the snapper.
Item 2. Snapper. If he is the snapper, no part of his body may be beyond the neutral zone.
Item 3. Team B. A Team B player is considered to be on the line of scrimmage if he is within one yard of the neutral zone.
ARTICLE 4. ENCROACHING. A player is encroaching (7-4-3) on the neutral zone when any part of his body is in it, and he
contacts an offensive player or the ball prior to the snap.
ARTICLE 5. LOOSE BALL CROSSES LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. A loose ball has crossed the line of scrimmage when, as the
result of a fumble, pass, or legal kick by a Team A player, it touches the ground or any player or official beyond the neutral zone.
SECTION 19 OFFSIDE
A player is offside when any part of his body or his person is in the neutral zone, or is beyond the kicking team’s restraining line
for an onside kick or fair catch kick line when the ball is put in play, unless he is a holder of a place kick for an onside kick (6-1-6-
d-1) or fair catch kick (11-4-3), or a kicker for an onside kick (6-1-6-d-2). The snapper is offside if any part of his body is beyond
the neutral zone. The kicker is not offside unless his kicking foot is beyond his restraining line when the ball is kicked.
SECTION 20 OUT OF BOUNDS, INBOUNDS, AND INBOUNDS SPOT
ARTICLE 1. PLAYER OR OFFICIAL OUT OF BOUNDS. A player or an official is out of bounds when he touches a boundary
line, or when he touches anything that is on or outside a boundary line, except a player, an official, or a pylon.
ARTICLE 2. PLAYER INBOUNDS. A player who has been out of bounds reestablishes himself as an inbounds player when both
feet, or any part of his body other than his hands, touch the ground within the boundary lines, provided that no part of his body is
touching a boundary line or anything other than a player, an official, or a pylon on or outside a boundary line.
ARTICLE 3. BALL OUT OF BOUNDS.
Item 1. Ball in Player Possession. A ball that is in player possession is out of bounds when the runner is out of bounds, or when
the ball touches a boundary line or anything that is on or outside such line, except another player or an official.
Item 2. Loose Ball. A loose ball that is not in player control is out of bounds when it touches a boundary line or anything that is
on or outside such line, including a player, an official, or a pylon.
ARTICLE 4. OUT OF BOUNDS SPOT.
Item 1. Loose Ball. If a loose ball touches anything on or outside a boundary line, the out of bounds spot is the forward point of
the ball when the ball crosses the sideline.
Item 2. Runner Out of Bounds. If the ball is in player possession when that player goes out of bounds, the out of bounds spot is
the forward point of the ball when the ball crosses the sideline, or, if the ball does not cross the sideline, the forward point of the
ball at the instant the player is out of bounds.
Item 3. Runner Inbounds. If the ball, while in possession of a player who is inbounds, is declared out of bounds because of
touching anything that is out of bounds, the out of bounds spot is the yard line through the forward point of the ball at the instant
of such touching.
ARTICLE 5. INBOUNDS SPOT. The inbounds spot is a spot on the inbounds line (the hash marks) that passes through the spot
where the ball went out of bounds between the goal lines.
ARTICLE 6. PLAYER INSIDE THE LANDING ZONE. A player who has been outside the front yard line of the landing zone reestablishes
himself as a player inside the landing zone when both feet or any part of his body, other than his hands, touch the
ground within the landing zone, provided that no part of his body is touching outside the landing zone or anything other than a
player outside the landing zone.
ARTICLE 7. LOOSE BALL OUT OF LANDING ZONE. A loose ball on a kickoff or safety kick is outside the landing zone when
it first touches the ground or anything that is outside the front yard line of the landing zone, including a player.
SECTION 21 PASS
ARTICLE 1. PASS. A pass is the movement caused by a player intentionally throwing or shoveling/pushing (shovel pass) the
ball.
ARTICLE 2. PASSER AND PASSING TEAM. A player who makes a legal forward pass is known as the passer until the play
ends. The teammates of any player who passes the ball forward (legally or illegally) are known collectively as the passing team
or passers.
ARTICLE 3. FORWARD PASS. It is a forward pass if:
(a) the ball initially moves forward (to a point nearer the opponent’s goal line) after leaving the passer’s hand(s);
(b) the ball first touches the ground, a player, an official, or anything else at a point that is nearer the opponent’s goal line than
the point at which the ball leaves the passer’s hand(s); or
(c) when a Team A player is holding the ball to pass it forward, any intentional movement forward of his hand starts a forward
pass.
Item 1. Contact by Team B Player. If contact by an opponent materially affects a passer after the passer begins his throwing
motion, it is a forward pass if he passes the ball, regardless of where the ball strikes the ground, a player, an official, or anything
else. When this occurs, intentional grounding rules do not apply.
When a passer is contacted by an opponent before beginning his throwing motion, the direction of the pass is the responsibility of
the passer, and intentional grounding rules apply.
Item 2. Passer Tucks Ball. If the player loses possession of the ball during an attempt to bring it back toward his body, or if the
player loses possession after he has tucked the ball into his body, it is a fumble.
Item 3. Passer Re-Cocks His Arm. If the player loses possession of the ball while attempting to re-cock his arm, it is a fumble.
Item 4. Fumbled or Muffed Ball Goes Forward. The fact that a fumbled or muffed ball goes forward is disregarded, unless the
act is ruled intentional. If it is intentional, a fumbled ball that goes forward is a forward pass (8-1-1), and a muff is a bat (12-5-1).
ARTICLE 4. BACKWARD PASS. It is a backward pass if the yard line at which the ball is first touched by a player, or the ground
is parallel to or behind the yard line at which the ball leaves the passer’s hand. A snap becomes a backward pass when the
snapper releases the ball.
Note: If a pass is batted, muffed, punched, or kicked in any direction, its original designation as a forward pass or a backward
pass does not change.
SECTION 22 PENALTY
ARTICLE 1. PENALTY. A penalty is imposed upon a team that has committed a foul and may result in loss of down, loss of
yardage, an automatic first down, a charged timeout, a loss of playing time, withdrawal or disqualification of a player, extension of
a period, the award of a score, or a combination thereof.
ARTICLE 2. LOSS OF DOWN. The phrase loss of down indicates that a team committing a foul will not have the opportunity to
repeat the down after enforcement of any yardage penalty.
SECTION 23 PLAYER
A player is a participant of either team who is in the game.
SECTION 24 PLAYS
ARTICLE 1. FREE KICK PLAY. A free kick play begins with a legal or illegal free kick and ends when a player of either team
establishes possession of the ball, or when the ball is dead by rule. A running play begins when a player of Team B establishes
possession.
ARTICLE 2. PASSING PLAY. A passing play begins with the snap and ends when a forward pass thrown from behind the line
of scrimmage is caught by a player of either team or is incomplete. At the instant that a pass is caught, a running play begins.
ARTICLE 3. RUNNING PLAY. A running play begins in the following situations:
(a) If there is not a subsequent kick or legal or illegal forward pass from behind the line of scrimmage, a running play begins with
the snap.
(b) If there is a legal or illegal forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage, a running play begins when the forward
pass is caught by a player of either team.
(c) If there is a running play followed by an illegal forward pass thrown from beyond the line of scrimmage, or by an illegal forward
pass not from scrimmage, a new running play begins when the pass is caught by a player of either team.
(d) If there is a free kick, a running play begins when Team B establishes possession of the ball.
(e) If there is a scrimmage kick, a running play begins when Team B establishes possession of the ball, or when Team A
establishes possession of a kicked ball behind the line of scrimmage.
(f) If there is a running play followed by a fumble or a backward pass, a new running play begins when a player of either team
establishes possession of the ball.
A running play ends:
(a) When the ball is declared dead;
(b) When a runner loses or relinquishes possession by a fumble or a backward pass; or
(c) When a player of either team throws an illegal forward pass beyond the line of scrimmage or when there is not a line of
scrimmage.
Note: The running play includes the loose ball action before a player gains or regains possession or the ball is declared dead.
ARTICLE 4. SCRIMMAGE KICK PLAY. A scrimmage kick play begins with the snap. It ends when a player of either team
establishes possession of a kicked ball, or when the ball is dead by rule.
ARTICLE 5. FAIR CATCH KICK PLAY. A fair catch kick play begins when the ball is kicked. It ends when a player of either team
establishes possession of the ball, or when the ball is dead by rule.
ARTICLE 6. COMBINATIONS OF PLAYS. There may be a combination of a running play and a passing play, free kick play,
scrimmage kick play, or fair catch kick play during the same down, and there may be more than one running play or scrimmage
kick play during the same down.
SECTION 25 POCKET AREA
The pocket area is the area between the outside edges of the normal tackle positions on each side of the center extending
backward to the offensive team’s end line. A player who is in possession of the ball is out of the pocket area, and the pocket area
no longer exists, if any part of his body or the ball is outside of the pocket area.
SECTION 26 POST-POSSESSION FOUL
A foul by the receiving team is a post-possession foul if it occurs during a scrimmage kick that crosses the line of scrimmage,
provided that the receiving team does not lose possession during the rest of the down. See 9-5-1-Exc. 4.
SECTION 27 RUNNER
A runner is the offensive player who is in possession of a live ball (3-2-7), i.e., holding the ball or carrying it in any direction.
SECTION 28 SAFETY
It is a safety, if the ball is dead in possession of a team on or behind its own goal line when the impetus (3-16) comes from the
team defending that goal line. If the offense commits a foul behind its own goal line, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce
the penalty at that spot.
SECTION 29 SCRIMMAGE DOWN, FROM SCRIMMAGE, NOT FROM SCRIMMAGE
A scrimmage down is one that starts with a snap (3-31). From scrimmage refers to any action from the start of the snap until the
down ends or until Team B secures possession. Any action that occurs during the down after a change of team possession is not
from scrimmage.
SECTION 30 SHIFT
A shift is any simultaneous change of position or stance by two or more offensive players before the snap after the ball has been
made ready for play for a scrimmage down, including movement to the line of scrimmage by the offensive team prior to the snap
(7-4-7).
SECTION 31 SNAP AND THE SNAPPER
A snap is a backward pass that puts the ball in play to start a scrimmage down, either by handing it or passing it backward from
its position on the ground. The snapper is the offensive player who initiates this action.
SECTION 32 SUSPENDED PLAYER
A suspended player is one who must be withdrawn, in accordance with Rule 5, for correction of illegal equipment (5-4).
SECTION 33 TIGHT END BOX
The tight end box is a rectangle that is enclosed by imaginary lines two yards outside the normal tackle positions and five yards
on either side of the line of scrimmage. The tight end box continues to exist after the ball leaves the area.
SECTION 34 TACKLING
Tackling is an attempt by a defensive player to hold a runner to halt his advance or bring him to the ground.
SECTION 35 TEAM A AND B, OFFENSE AND DEFENSE
ARTICLE 1. OFFENSE AND DEFENSE. Whenever a team is in possession of the ball (3-2-7), it is the offense, and its opponent
is the defense. When there is a change of possession during the down, the team that is the offense becomes the defense.
ARTICLE 2. TEAM A AND TEAM B. The team that puts the ball in play is Team A, and its opponent is Team B. They remain
Team A and Team B until a down ends, even though there may be one or more changes of possession during the down. Team A
is always the offense when a down starts but becomes the defense if Team B secures possession during the down. A player of
Team A is referred to as A1 and his teammates as A2, A3, etc. The opponents are B1, B2, etc.
ARTICLE 3. CHANGE OF POSSESSION. A change of possession occurs when a player of the defensive team secures
possession of a ball that has been kicked, passed, or fumbled by a player of the offensive team, or when the ball is awarded to
the opposing team by rule. A change of possession includes, but is not limited to:
(a) An interception of a forward pass;
(b) A catch or recovery of a fumble or backward pass;
(c) A catch or recovery of a scrimmage kick, free kick, or fair catch kick;
(d) When the offensive team fails to reach the line to gain on fourth down; or
(e) When the offensive team misses a field goal attempt.
SECTION 36 TIMEOUT OR TIME IN
ARTICLE 1. TIMEOUT. A timeout is any interval during which the game clock is stopped (4-4) and includes the intermission (4-
1-2 and 4-1-3).
During any timeout, including an intermission, all playing rules continue in effect. Representatives of either team are prohibited
from entering the field, unless they are incoming substitutes, or team attendants or trainers entering to provide for the welfare of
a player, and any game-type activities are prohibited on the field of play. The head coach may enter the field to check on the
welfare of a player who is injured, but no assistant coach may enter the field.
ARTICLE 2. CHARGED TEAM TIMEOUT. A charged team timeout is an interval during which the game clock is stopped and
play is suspended at the request of one of the teams or when it is charged to one of the teams by rule. A timeout may be granted
only when the ball is dead.
ARTICLE 3. TIME IN. Time In is any interval during which the game clock is running (4-3).
SECTION 37 TOUCHBACK
It is a touchback if the ball is dead on or behind the goal line a team is defending, provided that the impetus comes from an
opponent, and that it is not a touchdown or an incomplete pass.
SECTION 38 TOUCHDOWN
It is a touchdown if any part of the ball is on, above, or behind the opponent’s goal line while legally in possession of an inbounds
player, provided it is not a touchback.
SECTION 39 TRIPPING
Tripping is the use of the leg or foot to obstruct any opponent, including a runner (12-2-14).
SECTION 40 TRY
A Try is the attempt by a team that has scored a touchdown to add one point (by a field goal) or two points (by a touchdown)
during one untimed scrimmage down (11-3).
SECTION 41 TWO-MINUTE WARNING
The two-minute warning is an automatic timeout that occurs at the conclusion of the last down for which the ball is legally snapped
or kicked prior to two minutes remaining on the game clock in the second and fourth periods.
SECTION 42 T-FORMATION QUARTERBACK
A “T-Formation Quarterback” is defined as a player aligned one yard or less behind the snapper.