RULE 14 PENALTY ENFORCEMENT
(Governing all cases not otherwise specifically provided for)
SECTION 1 GENERAL RULES
ARTICLE 1. REFUSAL OF PENALTIES. Unless expressly prohibited, the penalty for any foul may be declined by the offended
team and play proceeds as though no foul had been committed. The yardage distance for any penalty may be declined, even
though the penalty is accepted. The offended team may not change its decision to accept or decline a penalty after the penalty
has been fully administered or the ball has been made ready for play unless Rule 15-7-3-Item 3 applies. In all situations, a
disqualified or suspended player must be removed, regardless of the number of fouls or their enforcement, including if the penalty
is declined.
ARTICLE 2. NUMBER OF DOWN AFTER PENALTY.
Item 1. Foul by Team A. If the ball is behind the line to gain after the enforcement of a distance penalty for a foul by Team A that
occurs prior to (between downs) or during a play from scrimmage, the number of the ensuing down remains the same, unless it is
a combination penalty involving loss of down (see Item 2).
Item 2. Combination Penalty. A combination penalty involving both distance and loss of down is enforced for the following fouls:
(a) Illegal forward pass from behind or beyond the line (8-1-2)
(b) Intentional grounding (8-2-1)
(c) Backward pass that conserves time (8-7-2)
(d) Illegally handing the ball forward (8-7-4)
(e) Illegal punt, drop kick, or place kick (9-1-1)
(f) Illegal batting of the ball (12-5-1)
(g) Illegal kicking of the ball (12-5-2)
If a loss-of-down penalty is enforced prior to fourth down, the number of the ensuing down is one greater than that of the previous
down. If it is enforced on fourth down, the ball is awarded to Team B; if there is a combination penalty on fourth down, the distance
penalty is also enforced.
Item 3. Line to Gain and Change of Possession. If a change (or multiple changes) of possession is negated by enforcement of
a penalty against Team A during a play from scrimmage, the line to gain for Team A remains the same.
Item 4. Ball in Advance of Line to Gain. If the ball is in advance of the line to gain after the enforcement of a distance penalty
for a foul by Team A during a play from scrimmage, it is first-and-10 for Team A. It is also first-and-10 after enforcement for a dead
ball foul (Section 4, Article 9) by Team A at the end of a play from scrimmage when there has not been a change of possession.
Exception: A foul against an official, a team initiating a challenge when it has exhausted its timeouts, and a fifth and
subsequent excess timeout for injury, regardless of when they occur, are always treated as a foul between downs.
Item 5. Foul by Team B. After a penalty for a foul by Team B prior to, during, or after a play from scrimmage, the ensuing down
is first-and-10 for Team A.
Exceptions:
(1) Offside
(2) Encroachment
(3) Neutral zone infraction
(4) Delay of game
(5) Illegal substitution
(6) Excess time out
(7) Running into the kicker
(8) More than 11 players on the field at the snap
(9) More than 11 players in the formation prior to the snap
(10) Illegal formation by the defense during a scrimmage kick play
For the above exceptions, the number of the down and the line to gain remain the same unless a distance penalty places the ball
on or in advance of the line to gain, in which case it is first-and-10 for Team A.
Item 6. Foul After Change of Possession. If there is a foul, including a dead ball foul, after team possession has changed during
a down, following enforcement of a distance penalty, it is first-and-10 for the team that was in possession at the time of the foul.
Item 7. Foul Between Downs. If there is a foul between downs, the down remains the same, unless enforcement of the foul
results in a first down.
Item 8. Double Fouls. If there is a double foul during the down, and the fouls offset, the down is replayed, and the number of the
down remains the same.
ARTICLE 3. CHOICE OF PENALTIES (MULTIPLE FOULS). If there is a multiple foul (3-13-1-d) during the down, only one
penalty may be enforced after the Referee has explained the alternatives to the offended team.
Exceptions:
(1) A foul against an official, a team initiating a challenge when it has exhausted its timeouts, and a fifth and subsequent
excess timeout for injury are not part of a multiple foul and will be enforced in addition to any other foul.
(2) If there is a personal foul that is also defensive pass interference, both fouls may be enforced.
SECTION 2 SPECIAL ENFORCEMENT FOR PENALTIES
ARTICLE 1. HALF-DISTANCE PENALTY. If the enforcement of a distance penalty would move the ball more than half the
distance from the spot of enforcement to the offender’s goal line, the penalty shall be half the distance from the spot of enforcement
to its goal line. This general rule supersedes any other general or specific enforcement of a distance penalty.
Exceptions:
(1) See Rule 8-2-1 for enforcement for intentional grounding.
(2) See Rule 12-3-4 for enforcement for a palpably unfair act.
ARTICLE 2. FOUL BEHIND A GOAL LINE.
(a) When the spot of enforcement for a foul by the defense is behind the offensive goal line, a distance penalty is enforced from
the goal line. However, if the play results in a touchback, the penalty is enforced from the 20-yard line, or from the 35-yard
line or 20-yard line (as applicable by Rule 6-1-5) if the impetus was from a free kick. See Section 4, Article 6 for fouls during
a backward pass or fumble and Section 4, Article 4 (b), Note, for exception when a player’s momentum carries him into the
end zone.
(b) When the spot of enforcement for a foul by the offense is behind the offensive goal line, it is a safety if the defense elects to
enforce the penalty at that spot.
(c) When the spot of enforcement for a foul by the offense is behind the defensive goal line, a distance penalty is enforced from
the goal line.
ARTICLE 3. FOUL DURING A SCORE. If a team commits a personal or unsportsmanlike conduct foul, or a palpably unfair act,
during a down in which the opponent scores a field goal or safety, the penalty is enforced on the succeeding free kick (unless the
score resulted from the enforcement). On a touchdown, the penalty, whether a live ball or dead ball foul or a foul between downs,
is enforced on the Try. On a successful Try kick, any foul by Team B that does not result in a re-Try or negate a score may be
enforced on the succeeding free kick. In all scoring situations, the offended team also has the option of accepting the penalty with
customary enforcement and beginning a new series, or replaying the down, instead of counting the points.
ARTICLE 4. PERSONAL FOULS AND UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT FOULS. If any team commits a personal foul or
unsportsmanlike conduct foul that is not part of a double foul, and the opponent has possession at the end of the down,
enforcement may be from the dead ball spot in addition to any other enforcement options provided by rule.
SECTION 3 SPOT FROM WHICH PENALTY IS ENFORCED
ARTICLE 1. GOVERNING PROVISIONS. The general provisions of Rule 14 govern all spots of enforcement, except for specific
enforcements designated elsewhere in these rules.
ARTICLE 2. FOUL BY NON-PLAYER. Penalties for fouls committed by non-players shall be enforced as provided for in Rule 13.
ARTICLE 3. ENFORCEMENT SPOT NOT GOVERNED. When the spot of enforcement is not governed by a general or specific
rule, it is the spot of the foul.
ARTICLE 4. SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT. The spot of enforcement is the spot at which a penalty is enforced. The spots of
enforcement are as follows:
(a) The previous spot: The spot at which the ball was last put in play.
(b) The spot of the foul: The spot at which a foul was committed or, by rule, is considered to have been committed.
(c) The spot of a backward pass or a fumble: The spot at which the backward pass or fumble occurred during the down in which
there was a foul.
(d) The dead ball spot: The spot at which the ball became dead.
(e) The succeeding spot: The spot at which the ball will next be put in play (i.e., the spot of the ball after enforcement for a foul,
or, if there has been no foul, the spot at which the ball became dead).
(f) The other Try spot: The yard line of the other Try option, as determined by any previously enforced penalties, if applicable.
(g) The spot of a change of possession: The spot at which possession is gained by or awarded to the opponent.
ARTICLE 5. BASIC SPOT. The basic spot is a reference point that is used to determine the spot of enforcement for fouls
committed pursuant to the Three-and-One Method of Enforcement. It is applicable for fouls committed during (i) a running play or
(ii) a backward pass or fumble.
(a) For fouls committed during a running play which is not followed by a change of possession, the basic spot is the dead ball
spot.
(b) For fouls committed during a running play which is followed by a change of possession, the basic spot is the spot where
possession is lost.
(c) For fouls committed during a backward pass or fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or the spot of the
fumble.
ARTICLE 6. THREE-AND-ONE METHOD OF ENFORCEMENT. For fouls committed during a run, a backward pass, or a fumble,
the penalty is enforced from the basic spot if:
(a) the defense fouls in advance of the basic spot;
(b) the defense fouls behind the basic spot; or
(c) the offense fouls in advance of the basic spot.
If the offense fouls behind the basic spot, enforcement is from the spot of the foul (three-and-one method of enforcement).
Exceptions for fouls committed by the offense:
(1) Fouls committed by the offense behind the line of scrimmage are enforced from the previous spot.
(2) If the offense commits a foul behind its own goal line, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.
See Rule 8-2-1 for enforcement for intentional grounding.
(3) If the offense commits a foul beyond the line of scrimmage and the basic spot is behind the line of scrimmage,
enforcement is from the previous spot. If the dead ball spot is in the offensive end zone, it is a safety, regardless of where
the foul occurs.
(4) If the offense commits a foul in the defense’s end zone prior to scoring a touchdown, enforcement is from the goal line.
Exception for fouls committed by the defense:
(1) When the basic spot is behind the line of scrimmage, and the defense has committed a foul either behind or beyond the
line of scrimmage, the penalty is enforced from the previous spot.
SECTION 4 SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE 1. FOUL BEFORE OR AT THE SNAP.
Item 1. Before the Snap. A foul that occurs prior to the snap is enforced from the succeeding spot, and the down remains the
same, unless enforcement of the foul results in a first down.
Item 2. At the Snap. A foul that occurs at the snap is enforced from the previous spot, and the down is repeated, unless
enforcement of the foul results in a first down.
ARTICLE 2. FOUL COMMITTED DURING RUNNING PLAY. For a foul committed during a running play when there is not a
subsequent change of possession during the down, the basic spot is the dead ball spot. The three-and-one method of enforcement
is used (see Section 3, Article 6).
Note: A foul during a run prior to a forward pass or kick from behind the line is enforced as a foul during a passing play or
during a scrimmage kick.
ARTICLE 3. FOUL COMMITTED DURING RUNNING PLAY BEFORE CHANGE OF POSSESSION. When a foul occurs during
a running play, and the run in which the foul occurs is followed by a change of possession, the basic spot is the spot where
possession is lost. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used (see Section 3, Article 6).
(a) If the foul is by the defensive team, the ball reverts to the offensive team prior to enforcement of the foul.
(b) If the foul is by the offensive team, the defense must decline the penalty to retain possession. However, if the foul by the
offense was a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul, the defense retains possession, and enforcement is from the
dead ball spot. If the defense subsequently loses possession, the penalty is enforced from the spot where possession
changed, and the defense retains possession.
(c) If there are multiple fouls by the defense, the enforcement shall be that which is most beneficial to the offense.
ARTICLE 4. FOUL COMMITTED AFTER CHANGE OF POSSESSION (END ZONE ENFORCEMENT). If there is a foul by either
team after a change of possession, and the dead ball spot is in Team B’s end zone, enforcement shall be as follows:
(a) Fouls by Team A:
(1) If the impetus was provided by Team B, enforcement is from the goal line. See Note below for exception when a player’s
momentum carries him into the end zone.
(2) If the impetus was provided by Team A, enforcement is from the 20-yard line, or from the 35-yard line or 20-yard line (as
applicable by Rule 6-1-5) if the impetus was from a free kick.
(b) Fouls by Team B (Team A impetus):
(1) If Team B attempts to advance the ball, and the spot of its foul is in the end zone, the result is a safety.
(2) If Team B does not attempt to advance the ball, and its foul occurs in the end zone, enforcement is from the 20-yard line,
or from the 35-yard line or 20-yard line (as applicable by Rule 6-1-5) if the impetus was from a free kick.
(3) If the spot of its foul is in the field of play, the penalty is enforced from either the spot of the foul or the touchback spot
(20 or 35), whichever is least beneficial to Team B, regardless of whether Team B attempts to advance the ball.
Note: If a Team B player’s original momentum carries him into his end zone, where the ball is declared dead in his team’s
possession, the dead ball spot is considered to be the spot at which the player established possession. See 11-5-1-Exc. 2.
(c) Fouls by Team B (Team B impetus):
(1) Regardless of whether the foul is in the field of play or in the end zone, the result is a safety.
ARTICLE 5. FOUL COMMITTED DURING PASSING PLAY. If there is a foul by either team from the time of the snap until a
forward pass thrown from behind the line ends, the penalty is enforced from the previous spot. A pass play ends and a running
play begins at the instant that a pass is caught.
Exceptions:
(a) Intentional grounding is a loss of down at the spot of the foul, or a loss of down and a 10-yard penalty from the previous
spot, whichever is less beneficial for the offense. If the foul occurs less than 10 yards behind the line of scrimmage, but
more than half the distance to the goal line, the ball shall be placed at the spot of the pass. (If the pass is thrown from
the end zone, it is a safety).
(b) Pass interference by the defense is enforced at the spot of the foul. If the spot of the interference is behind the defensive
team’s goal line and the previous spot was on or outside the defense’s two-yard line, then it is first down for the offensive
team on the defense’s one-yard line at the inbounds spot corresponding to the spot of the interference, or, if the previous
spot was inside the defense’s two-yard line, the penalty shall be halfway between the previous spot and the goal line,
and it is first down for the offensive team. See Rule 8, Section 5, Penalty.
(c) It is a safety when the offensive team commits a foul behind its own goal line if the defense elects to enforce the penalty
at that spot.
(d) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the defense prior to the completion of a forward pass thrown
from behind the line, enforcement is from the previous spot or the dead ball spot, whichever is more beneficial to the
offense. If the play results in a score for the offense, enforcement is on the Try. If the passing team is fouled and
subsequently loses possession after a completion, the passing team retains possession of the ball, and enforcement is
from the previous spot.
(e) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense prior to the offense losing possession during a
pass play or a subsequent running play, enforcement is from the dead ball spot. However, if the defense subsequently
loses possession, the penalty is enforced from the spot of the defense's catch or recovery, and the defense retains
possession. This also applies to a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense prior to a forward pass
thrown from behind the line when the offense fails to make the line to gain.
Notes:
(1) The penalty for a forward pass from behind the line after the ball has been beyond the line, or for a second forward pass
from behind the line, is enforced from the previous spot, unless the spot of the pass is behind the passer’s goal line, in
which case it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.
(2) If a forward pass is thrown from beyond the line of scrimmage, or when there is no line of scrimmage, it is a foul during
a running play.
ARTICLE 6. FOUL DURING A BACKWARD PASS OR FUMBLE. If there is a foul by either team during a backward pass or
fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or fumble. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used (see Section
3, Article 6).
(a) When the spot of the backward pass or fumble is beyond the line of scrimmage, or when there is not a line of scrimmage,
and there is a foul during the backward pass or fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or the spot of the
fumble. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used. See 14-3-6.
(b) When the spot of a backward pass or fumble is behind the line of scrimmage, all fouls committed by either team, including
a foul by Team B in Team A’s end zone, are enforced from the previous spot, except a foul by the offense in its end zone
is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.
(c) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense during a fumble or backward pass that is
recovered by the defense, enforcement is from the dead ball spot. If the recovering team subsequently loses possession,
the penalty is enforced from the spot of its recovery, and it retains possession. This also applies to a personal foul or
unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense during a fumble or backward pass that is recovered by the offense, and the
offense fails to make the line to gain.
Notes:
(1) If Team B gains possession in its end zone, and the impetus was provided by Team A, if Team B fumbles or throws a
backward pass in the end zone and fouls while the ball is loose, the spot of the fumble or the backward pass is considered
to be the B20-yard line, or the B35-yard line or B20-yard line (as applicable) if the impetus was from a free kick.
(2) If a Team B player’s original momentum carries him into his end zone, where he fumbles the ball, the spot of the fumble
is considered to be the spot at which the player established possession. See 11-5-1-Exc. 2.
ARTICLE 7. FOUL DURING FREE KICK PLAY. If there is a foul during a free kick, enforcement is from the previous spot, and
the free kick is made again. However, if the kicking team commits a foul prior to the end of the kick, or the receiving team commits
a foul at or during a kickoff or safety kick, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, the offended team will
have the option of enforcing the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down or enforcing the penalty yardage from the
dead ball spot. The dead ball spot for free kicks that result in a touchback is the 20-yard line or 35-yard line. (See Rule 6, Section
1, Article 5).
Exceptions:
(a) A personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot if it occurs in
Team B’s end zone;
(b) A foul for fair catch interference is enforced from the spot of the foul;
(c) A foul for interference with the opportunity to make a catch is enforced from the spot of the foul;
(d) A foul for an invalid fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot if it occurs in Team B’s end
zone;
(e) A foul for an illegal double team block, or an illegal wedge during the free kick, is enforced from the spot of the foul, or
the previous spot if the foul occurs in Team B’s end zone.
(f) For a free kick out of bounds or not reaching the landing zone, see 6-2-4.
(g) For a free kick illegally touched, see 6-2-5.
Note: In (a), (b), (c), and (e) above, if the foul is not part of a double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the
down, the foul may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See 14-2-4.
A free kick ends when Team B establishes possession. Fouls by Team A prior to the time that Team B establishes possession
are offensive fouls. If Team A legally recovers a free kick, there is no change of possession. After Team B establishes possession,
a running play begins, and fouls that occur thereafter are enforced from the dead ball spot or the spot of the foul (three-and-one
method).
ARTICLE 8. FOUL DURING SCRIMMAGE KICK PLAY. If there is a foul from the time of the snap until a legal scrimmage kick
ends, enforcement is from the previous spot. This includes a foul during a run prior to a legal kick, and a foul by the kicking team
during a missed field goal attempt.
Exceptions:
(1) If the offensive team commits a foul in its own end zone, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that
spot.
(2) If there is a foul by the kicking team, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, the receiving team
will have the option of taking the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down, or adding the penalty yardage on
to the dead ball spot.
Notes:
(a) The dead ball spot for scrimmage kicks that result in a touchback is the 20-yard line (see 11-4-2-b for a missed field
goal from beyond the 20-yard line).
(b) If there is a foul for an illegal touch inside the five-yard line, the receiving team also has the option of accepting a
touchback.
(c) If there is a foul by the kicking team during a missed field goal attempt where the receiving team is awarded the ball
(see 11-4-2), enforcement is from the succeeding spot.
(3) Penalties for fair catch interference, interference with the opportunity to make a catch, an invalid fair catch signal, or a
personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal are enforced from the spot of the foul. If the personal foul is not part of a
double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, it may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See
14-2-4.
(4) Except for fouls that are committed in an attempt to block the kick (such as running into or roughing the kicker, defensive
holding (pull-and-shoot), leverage, leaping, and pushing teammate(s) into the offensive formation), if the receiving team
commits a foul during a scrimmage kick play that crosses the line of scrimmage, the penalty for its infraction will be
enforced as if it had been in possession of the ball at the time the foul occurred (a post-possession foul), provided that
the receiving team does not lose possession of the ball at any time during the down. The penalty shall be enforced from
whichever of the following spots is least beneficial to the receiving team:
(a) the end of the kick; or
(b) the spot of the foul.
If the foul occurs in the end zone, it is deemed to have occurred at the 20-yard line, unless enforcement results in a safety
(14-4-4).
(5) For enforcement of a personal or unsportsmanlike conduct foul on a play that results in a score, see 14-2-3; for an illegal
bat, see 12-5-1; and for illegally kicking a loose ball, see 12-5-2.
When Team B establishes possession of the ball, a scrimmage kick ends, and a running play begins, and fouls that occur thereafter
are enforced from the dead ball spot or the spot of the foul (three-and-one method, 14-3-6).
ARTICLE 9. DEAD BALL FOUL AND FOUL BETWEEN DOWNS. A dead ball foul is a foul that occurs in the continuing action
after a down ends, or a taunting foul that occurs at any time. If the foul occurs simultaneously with the ball becoming dead, it is
considered a dead ball foul. The penalty for a dead ball foul is enforced from the succeeding spot, and the down counts.
A foul between downs is a foul that occurs after the end of the down and after any continuing action resulting from the down, but
prior to the next snap or free kick. The penalty for a foul between downs is enforced from the succeeding spot, and the down
counts, but it cannot be combined with a live ball foul or a dead ball foul to create a multiple or double foul. A foul between downs
is always enforced separately from any other foul. A foul against an official, regardless of when it occurs, is always treated as a
foul between downs. See 12-3-1-e-Pen.
Exception: If there is a personal, unsportsmanlike conduct, or taunting foul by either team following the end of the second or
fourth periods, the penalty yardage will be enforced on the second-half kickoff or the kickoff in overtime, unless it is part of a
double foul (See Section 5).
Item 1. Dead Ball Foul by Team A. If there is a dead ball foul by Team A after a down in which Team A has made a first down,
after enforcement of the penalty it will be first-and-10 for Team A. If there is a foul between downs after a down in which Team A
has made a first down, after enforcement of the penalty it will be first-and-25 for Team A.
Item 2. Dead Ball Fouls by Both Teams. Dead ball fouls by both teams are offset at the succeeding spot, and the down counts,
but any disqualified player or players must be removed pursuant to Rule 5, Section 2, Article 7.
Item 3. Live Ball and Dead Ball Fouls. Live ball fouls and dead ball fouls combine to create double fouls or multiple fouls, and
all customary rules for enforcement apply.
Exceptions:
(1) If there is a 5-yard versus 15-yard double foul on the last play of a half, and the 15-yard penalty is for a dead ball foul
(personal, unsportsmanlike conduct, or taunting) by either team, the penalty yardage will be enforced on the second half
kickoff or the kickoff to start overtime. There will be no extension of the period.
(2) If the scoring team commits a dead ball foul after a score, and its opponent’s live ball foul is not for a personal foul or
unsportsmanlike conduct, the opponent’s foul is disregarded, the score counts, and the offensive team’s dead ball foul is
enforced on the Try or succeeding free kick if there is no Try. If the opponent’s foul is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike
conduct, the score counts, and the fouls offset after the play.
(3) If the only foul by the defense is a dead ball foul on the last play of the half (“clean hands end of half”). If the foul by the
offense is not a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct, it is disregarded, and the dead ball personal foul or dead ball
unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the defense will be enforced on the second half kickoff or to start overtime. If both
teams’ fouls are for a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct, those fouls offset at the end of the down.
SECTION 5 FOULS BY BOTH TEAMS (DOUBLE FOULS)
ARTICLE 1. DOUBLE FOUL WITHOUT CHANGE OF POSSESSION. If there is a double foul (3-13-1-e) during a down in which
there is not a change of possession, the penalties are offset, and the down is replayed at the previous spot. If it is a scrimmage
down, the number of the next down and the line to gain is the same as for the down in which the fouls occurred. Penalties for
double fouls cannot be declined by either team.
Exceptions:
(1) If one or more fouls by one team includes a 15-yard penalty, and the penalty for the foul or fouls committed by the other
team is for a five-yard penalty without an automatic first down, a loss of down, or a 10-second runoff (15 yards versus
five yards), or that is not a spot foul, the 15-yard penalty is enforced from the previous spot, and the five-yard penalty is
disregarded.
(2) Five versus 15 enforcement cannot be declined by the team that committed the minor foul, except as described in (3)
below. See 4-8-2-h and 14-4-9-Item 3-Exc. 1 for dead ball fouls at the end of a half.
(3) If one of the fouls is a dead ball foul for delay of game for spiking the ball and the opponent’s foul is a live ball foul, the
team that committed the delay of game foul, in addition to Article 1 above, will have the option to decline the foul
committed by its opponent and be assessed the penalty for delay from the dead ball spot.
(4) If both fouls are dead ball fouls or are treated as such (14-4-9), the penalties are offset, and the ball is next put in play at
the succeeding spot, unless the dead ball fouls occur after the ball has been made ready for play, in which case five
versus 15 enforcement applies.
(5) 14-4-9-Item 3 exceptions for dead ball fouls at the end of a half or after a score.
ARTICLE 2. DOUBLE FOUL WITH A CHANGE OF POSSESSION.
Item 1. If there is a double foul during a down in which there is a change or changes of possession, including if one of the fouls
is a post-possession foul by Team B during a scrimmage kick, the team last gaining possession will keep the ball after
enforcement for its foul, provided it did not foul prior to last gaining possession (“clean hands”).
Exceptions:
(1) If Team A fouls during a free kick or scrimmage kick prior to the change of possession, Team B may elect to replay the
down at the previous spot.
(2) If a safety results from the enforcement of a foul by Team B, the down is replayed at the previous spot.
(3) If the offense’s foul is for a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct before the change of possession, the penalties
offset, and the team last in possession shall retain the ball at the spot where its foul would be enforced if it was the only
foul. In this event, (1) and (2) above also apply.
Item 2. If the team last in possession does not have "clean hands" when it establishes possession, the penalties offset, and the
down is replayed at the previous spot.
ARTICLE 3. DOUBLE FOUL AFTER A CHANGE OF POSSESSION.
Item 1. If there is a double foul during a down in which there is a change or changes of possession including if one of the fouls is
a post-possession foul by Team B during a scrimmage kick, and if both teams foul after the last change of possession (double
foul after a change of possession), the penalties are offset, and the team last in possession shall retain the ball at the spot where
its foul would be enforced if it was the only foul. If the spot is normally a touchback, the ball is placed on the 20-yard line, or the
35-yard line or 20-yard line (as applicable by Rule 6-1-5) if the impetus was from a free kick. If it is normally a safety, the ball is
placed on the one-yard line.
Item 2. If there is a double foul after a change of possession and the offense also fouled prior to the change of possession, the
enforcement outlined in this Article, Item 1 shall apply. If this is the case on a kicking play, Team B may elect to replay the down
at the previous spot. In all situations, if the team last in possession does not have "clean hands" when it establishes possession,
the penalties offset, and the down is replayed at the previous spot.