RULE 15 INSTANT REPLAY
SECTION 1 INITIATING A REPLAY REVIEW
ARTICLE 1. COACH CHALLENGES. Each team is permitted a minimum of two challenges that will initiate Instant Replay reviews:
(a) The head coach can initiate a challenge by throwing a red flag onto the field of play before the next legal snap or kick.
(b) A team that commits a foul that prevents the next snap can no longer challenge the previous play. The non-fouling team can
still challenge the previous play, and both teams can benefit from the review.
(c) The head coach may challenge on-field rulings listed in Section 3, except for those plays that only the Replay Official can
review (Article 2).
(d) Each challenge requires an available team timeout. A team that is out of timeouts, or has used all its available challenges,
may not attempt to initiate a challenge.
A team that initiates a challenge when the team is not permitted to challenge will be charged a team timeout.
Penalty: For initiating a challenge when a team has exhausted its timeouts: Loss of 15 yards enforced as a foul between
downs.
(e) If a challenge is unsuccessful, the team will be charged a timeout.
(f) A team will be permitted a third challenge if it is successful on at least one of its challenges. A fourth challenge will not be
permitted.
ARTICLE 2. REPLAY OFFICIAL REQUEST FOR REVIEW. Only the Replay Official or the Senior Vice President of Officiating or
his or her designee may initiate a review of a play:
(a) that begins after the two-minute warning of each half;
(b) throughout any overtime period;
(c) when points are scored by either team;
(d) that is a Try attempt (successful or unsuccessful); and
(e) when on-field officials rule:
(1) an interception by an opponent;
(2) a fumble or backward pass recovered by an opponent or that goes out of bounds through the opponent’s end zone;
(3) that the offense failed to reach the line to gain on fourth down;
(4) possession by the kicking team at the end of any free kick or scrimmage kick down; or
(5) a disqualification of a player.
Such plays may be reviewed regardless of whether a foul is committed on the play that, if accepted, would negate the on-field
ruling.
The Replay Official may only initiate a review of a play until the next legal snap or kick. The Replay Official may consult with a
designated member of the Officiating department at the League office regarding whether to initiate a review.
SECTION 2 REPLAY REVIEWS
All Replay Reviews will be conducted by the Senior Vice President of Officiating or his or her designee. Reviews are conducted
in consultation with the Replay Official and the Referee, who will have access to a field-level video monitor. An expedited review
can occur without consultation with the Referee. The video will not be shared with the Referee on the field when there is an
expedited review.
ARTICLE 1. CHANGING A RULING. An on-field ruling will be changed only when the Senior Vice President of Officiating or his
or her designee determines that clear and obvious video evidence warrants a change.
ARTICLE 2. SCOPE OF REVIEW. Once a review is initiated, all reviewable aspects of a play (Section 3) may be examined and
are subject to change, even if not the specific reason for the challenge.
ARTICLE 3. AWARDING POSSESSION. When the on-field ruling results in a dead ball (e.g., score, down by contact, incomplete
pass, etc.), and following replay review it is determined that possession was lost before the ball should have been ruled dead,
possession may be awarded to a player who clearly recovers a loose ball in the immediate continuing action. A loose ball that
touches out of bounds is deemed a clear recovery by the player who last possessed the ball.
Note: If on-field officials make a preliminary ruling of which team recovered the ball, that preliminary ruling may constitute a
clear recovery.
ARTICLE 4. EACH RULING REVIEWED SEPARATELY. Any aspect of a ruling that is not changed will be considered a correct
ruling for purposes of reviewing the play.
SECTION 3 REVIEWABLE RULINGS
ARTICLE 1. PLAY SITUATIONS. The Replay System will cover the following play situations:
(a) Plays involving possession (see Section 3, Article 2).
(b) Plays involving touching of either the ball or the ground (see Section 3, Article 3).
(c) Plays governed by the goal line (see Section 3, Article 4).
(d) Plays governed by the boundary lines (see Section 3, Article 5).
(e) Plays governed by the line of scrimmage (see Section 3, Article 6).
(f) Plays governed by the line to gain (see Section 3, Article 7).
(g) Number of players on the field (see Section 3, Article 8).
(h) Game administration (see Section 3, Article 9).
(1) Penalty enforcement.
(2) Proper down.
(3) Spot of a foul.
(4) Status of the game clock.
(i) Disqualification of a player (see Section 3, Article 10).
(j) Other reviewable plays (see Section 3, Article 11).
ARTICLE 2. PLAYS INVOLVING POSSESSION.
Item 1. Completion of a Pass. Whether a pass was complete or incomplete.
Notes:
(1) Incomplete Changed to Catch. If a ruling of incomplete is changed to a catch, the ball will be placed at the spot where it
was when the receiver’s second foot or a body part touched the ground with control. No advance is awarded.
(2) Incomplete Changed to Catch and Fumble. When a ruling of incomplete is changed to a catch and fumble, the ball will
be awarded at the spot of recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no
clear recovery, the ball will be awarded to the team last in possession at the spot where possession was lost.
Item 2. Recovery of a Loose Ball. Whether a player legally recovered a loose ball in the field of play, at the sideline, goal line, or
in the end zone.
Item 3. Forward Pass or Fumble. Whether a passer’s hand started forward with control of the ball, or whether the ball was
fumbled.
Notes:
(1) When an on-field ruling is incomplete, and the passer clearly fumbled the ball, the ball will be awarded at the spot of
recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no clear recovery, the ball will be
awarded to the team last in possession at the spot where possession was lost, except that if possession was lost in the
team’s own end zone, and the ball was not clearly recovered in the end zone, the ball will be placed at the one-yard line.
(2)When a ruling of fumble is changed to an incomplete forward pass, a foul for intentional grounding can be created in replay
only if a pre-review announcement was made that a changed ruling would create the foul.
(3) This item applies to a ruling that a passer muffed a snap or spiked the ball to stop a running clock.
Item 4. Fumble. Whether a runner lost possession before he was down by contact or had given himself up.
Notes:
(1) When an on-field ruling is down by contact, and the runner clearly fumbled the ball, the ball will be awarded at the spot of
recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no clear recovery, the ruling on
the field stands.
(2) The spot of a forward fumble out of bounds, or a fumble that occurs on fourth down, or after the two-minute warning, or
during a Try, is reviewable regardless of whether on-field officials return the ball to the spot of the fumble, and regardless
of whether it involves a score, potential score, a change of possession, or the line to gain.
ARTICLE 3. PLAYS INVOLVING TOUCHING OF EITHER THE BALL OR THE GROUND.
Item 1. Down by Contact. Whether a player should have been ruled down by contact while in possession of the ball.
Item 2. Pass or Down by Contact. Whether the ball was thrown before the passer was ruled down by contact.
Note: When an on-field ruling is down by contact, and the passer clearly throws the ball before being down by contact, the
ball will be awarded at the spot of the completion or interception. No advance is permitted. If the pass is incomplete, the down
counts.
Item 3. Touching of a Forward Pass. Whether a player touched a forward pass.
Notes:
(1) Only the fact of touching, and not intent, is reviewable.
(2) A player touching a pass will remove a foul for offensive or defensive pass interference if the touching occurs away from
and noticeably before the interference.
Item 4. Touching of a Kick. Whether a player touched a kick and the spot of touching.
Note: A foul for running into or roughing the kicker or holder can be removed if the kicked ball was touched before the contact.
If a pre-review announcement was made that there was no foul because the ball was ruled to be touched, a foul for running
into or roughing the kicker or holder can be created in replay if the ball was not touched before the contact.
Item 5. Touching of a Loose Ball. Whether a player touched a loose ball.
Item 6. Ball Touching the Ground on a Free Kick. Whether a ball hit the ground after being kicked.
Item 7. Ball Touching the Ground on a Scrimmage Kick. Whether a ball touched the ground before being caught or recovered
by a punter or holder.
ARTICLE 4. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE GOAL LINE.
Item 1. Ball breaking the plane of the goal line. Whether any part of the ball broke the plane of the goal line while in player
possession and before the ball should have been declared dead.
Notes:
(1) A ruling of a touchdown can be reviewed to determine if the runner fumbled before the ball broke the plane of the goal
line. If there is no clear recovery in the immediate continuing action, the team that fumbled is awarded the ball at the spot
of the fumble.
(2) The dead ball spot is not reviewable to determine solely whether it should be closer to or further from the goal line.
Item 2. Momentum. Whether a player’s momentum spot was in the field of play or in the end zone (Rule 11-5-1-b, exc. 2). A
ruling of whether a player’s momentum caused him to enter his end zone is not reviewable.
Note: For purposes of a replay review, the momentum spot is the spot where the second foot (or other body part other than
the hands) touched the ground. If that spot is on the goal line or in the end zone, it is a touchback.
ARTICLE 5. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE BOUNDARY LINES.
Item 1. Runner Inbounds. A ruling that a runner was inbounds is reviewable to determine whether the runner touched out of
bounds.
Item 2. Runner Out of Bounds. A ruling that a runner was out of bounds is reviewable only to determine: (a) the spot of the ball
in relation to the line to gain or the goal line at the spot where the runner was ruled to have touched out of bounds; (b) if the runner
fumbled the ball before taking two additional steps beyond the spot where he was ruled out of bounds; or (c) if the ball was at or
beyond the line to gain or broke the plane of the goal line in the runner’s possession before taking two additional steps beyond
the spot where he was ruled out of bounds.
Item 3. Receiver Out of Bounds. Whether a receiver touched out of bounds is reviewable to determine whether he was eligible
to touch the ball and whether a defender could legally contact him.
Item 4. Passer Out of Bounds Before Throwing Pass. A ruling that a player stepped out of bounds before throwing a pass is
reviewable to determine if he was inbounds when he threw the pass.
Note: When an on-field ruling is out of bounds, and the passer clearly threw the ball before touching out of bounds, the ball
will be awarded at the spot of completion or interception. No advance is permitted. If the pass is incomplete, the down counts.
Item 5. Player Out of Bounds on Scrimmage Kick. Whether a player was out of bounds during a scrimmage kick is reviewable
to determine the spot of the ball and whether the ball was illegally touched.
Item 6. Loose Ball. Whether a loose ball touched a boundary line, anything on the boundary line, a pylon, or an object, or the
spot where a loose ball crossed the sideline.
Note: Ball That Does Not Touch a Boundary Line. If an on-field ruling that a loose ball touched a boundary line is changed,
possession can be awarded to a team that recovers the loose ball in the immediate continuing action.
ARTICLE 6. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE LINE OF SCRIMMAGE.
Item 1. Illegal Passes. Whether a forward pass was thrown when the passer was beyond the line of scrimmage, or after the ball
had crossed the line of scrimmage and returned behind it. Rule 8-1-2, Item 1.
Item 2. Illegal Kick. Whether a scrimmage kick was from beyond the line of scrimmage, or a second kick was made after the ball
had crossed the line of scrimmage. Rule 9-1-1.
ARTICLE 7. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE LINE TO GAIN. The dead ball spot is reviewable to determine whether it was short of,
at, or beyond the line to gain.
Notes:
(1) For purposes of a replay review, forward progress is determined when a player with control of the ball is contacted by an
opponent and driven backwards.
(2) A challenge is successful only if the ruling of whether a new series was awarded is changed, regardless of whether the
ball was moved closer to the line to gain.
(3) Following review, the ball will be placed at the correct dead ball spot, but the challenge will be successful only if the line
to gain ruling is changed.
ARTICLE 8. NUMBER OF PLAYERS ON THE FIELD. Whether a player is on the field at the snap or when officials rule a dead
ball foul for too many players in formation. For a player to be off the field, he must touch the ground out of bounds. For a player to
be on the field, both feet or a body part must touch the ground in the field of play.
ARTICLE 9. GAME CLOCK. The game clock is reviewable for purposes of restoring time to the clock but not for purposes of
taking time off the clock.
Notes:
(1) Time can be restored to the game clock if the clock operator incorrectly starts the game clock when it should remain
stopped, provided that the correction occurs before the next legal snap or kick.
(2) An on-field ruling that time expired during or after the last play of any half, or of an overtime period in the regular season,
or of an overtime half in the postseason, is reviewable by the Replay Official only when the visual evidence demonstrates
that the clock should have stopped with two or more seconds remaining. In the first half, time shall be restored only if the
additional play will be a snap from scrimmage. In the second half, time shall be restored only if the next play will be a snap
from scrimmage by a team that is trailing by eight points or less, or by either team if the score is tied.
(3) The game clock is reviewable to determine if it properly expired when on-field officials restore time after the last play of
any half, or of an overtime period in the regular season, or of an overtime half in the postseason. Visual evidence that a
clock should have stopped includes any situation when the clock stops by rule after the ball becomes dead. Visual
evidence that the clock should have stopped for a team timeout occurs when an official starts to raise his or her arm to
signal a stopped clock.
(4) The game clock is reviewable to determine if the period expired or the two-minute warning occurred before any snap.
ARTICLE 10. DISQUALIFICATION OF A PLAYER. The Senior Vice President of Officiating or his or her designee may review a
decision by on-field officials to disqualify a player. When reviewing a disqualification under this Article other reviewable aspects of
the play will not be reviewed unless the Replay Official would otherwise have authority to review the play, or it is challenged by a
head coach.
ARTICLE 11. OTHER REVIEWABLE PLAYS.
Item 1. Direction of a Pass. Whether a pass was forward or backward.
Note: When an on-field ruling is incomplete, and the pass was clearly backward, the ball will be awarded at the spot of
recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no clear recovery, the ball will be
awarded to the team last in possession at the spot where possession was lost.
Item 2. Illegal Forward Pass. Whether a pass was illegally thrown.
Item 3. Field Goal or Try Attempt. Whether a field goal or Try attempt crossed above the crossbar and inside the uprights is
reviewable, but only if the ball crosses the plane of the goal post below the top of the uprights, or if the ball touches anything.
Item 4. Illegal Forward Handoff. Whether a player received a handoff clearly in advance of a player making the handoff.
Item 5. Ball Touching a Foreign Object. Whether a loose ball touched a scoreboard, guide wire, or any other object.
Notes:
(1) The Replay Official can initiate a review for this item at any time during the game.
(2) If it is determined that the ball hit an object, the down will be replayed from the previous spot, and the game clock will be
reset to the time when the ball was snapped and will start on the snap.
SECTION 4 NON-REVIEWABLE PLAYS
The following aspects of plays are not reviewable:
(a) Whether an erroneous whistle sounded;
(b) Whether a ball was illegally batted or kicked;
(c) Whether a passer intentionally grounded a pass;
(d) Whether an ineligible receiver was downfield before a pass;
(e) Whether a receiver was illegally contacted;
(f) Whether a block was illegal; and
(g) Any aspect of a play not listed as reviewable in Section 3 of this Rule.
SECTION 5 GAME CLOCK ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 1. RESETTING GAME CLOCK. When a ruling is changed in replay, the clock status following review is determined by
Rule 4-3, and the game clock will be reset to the time when the ball should have been declared dead. The game clock is not reset
if the on-field ruling is not changed in replay.
ARTICLE 2. 10-SECOND RUNOFF. When a changed ruling results in a running clock, or a clock that would have otherwise
restarted before the next snap, for plays that begin after the two-minute warning, the clock is reset to the time when the play should
have ended, and the clock will run for 10 seconds from the reset time. If less than 10 seconds remain in the half or the game, the
half or the game is over.
Note: Neither team may decline a 10-second runoff under this Article, but either team can avoid the 10-second runoff by
taking a charged team timeout. If the 10-second runoff is avoided, the game clock will be reset to the time when the play
should have ended and will start on the snap.
SECTION 6 TIMEOUTS FOLLOWING REVIEW
ARTICLE 1. UNSUCCESSFUL CHALLENGE. A team that makes an unsuccessful challenge is charged a team timeout. If a team
takes a team timeout and then unsuccessfully challenges a play, it is charged a second timeout. A challenge is considered
successful if any reviewable aspect of the play is changed.
ARTICLE 2. CHARGED TIMEOUT RESTORED. A charged timeout taken after the two-minute warning of either half will be
restored if a review changes the ruling. An injury timeout can be charged or restored if a ruling changed in replay would affect
whether an injury timeout is charged.
SECTION 7 FOULS
ARTICLE 1. PENALTY ADMINISTRATION. Penalty administration, including the number of the down, yardage, the number of
the fouling player, and the spot of a foul, is reviewable.
ARTICLE 2. FOUL NULLIFIED BY A CHANGED RULING. A foul will be nullified when a necessary aspect of the foul is changed
in replay. A foul can be created following a review if the reviewable aspect creates the foul, or if the Referee announced before
the review that there was no foul on the play because of a specific ruling that is changed in the review.
ARTICLE 3. ENFORCEMENT OF FOULS FOLLOWING A CHANGED RULING
Item 1. Major Fouls. When a ruling is changed in replay, any foul that occurred after the ball should have been declared dead is
disregarded except for personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls. Live ball fouls that occurred on the reviewed play may
be enforced if they occurred before the ball should have been declared dead.
Item 2. Pre-Snap Fouls Before Challenge. Pre-snap fouls, other than personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls, that
occur before a replay review will be ignored if the ruling on the previous play is changed.
Item 3. Head Coach’s Ability to Change Penalty Decision. If a ruling is changed in replay, a head coach can change a decision
whether to accept or decline a penalty that was made before the review.
SECTION 8 LOSS OF COMMUNICATION
If communications between the officials and the League office are lost, the Referee will stay at the on-field monitor for one minute
while communications are being restored. If communications are not restored within one minute, the Referee will conduct the
replay review in consultation with the Replay Official. If communications are restored during the review, the League office will
review the play as normal.
SECTION 9 GAME ADMINISTRATION, CONSULTATION, AND ASSISTANCE
The Replay Official or designated members of the Officiating department may provide information regarding the correct application
of the playing rules, advise, consult with, or assist the on-field officials on specific, objective aspects of a play when clear and
obvious video evidence is present, and/or address game administration issues, including, but not limited to:
(a) penalty enforcement;
(b) the proper down;
(c) timing or spot of a foul;
(d) the game clock;
(e) possession;
(f) completed, intercepted, or the direction of any pass;
(g) touching of a loose ball, boundary line, goal line, or end line;
(h) location of the football or a player in relation to a line or the pocket area;
(i) down by contact (when a player is not ruled down by contact on the field);
(j) if a foul is called for:
1. roughing the passer based only on a hit to the passer’s head or neck area and there is clear and obvious video
evidence that the defender did not make any contact with the passer’s head or neck area;
2. intentional grounding and there is clear and obvious video evidence that the passer was out of the pocket area;
3. unnecessary roughness based only on:
a. forcibly contacting a runner when he is out of bounds and there is clear and obvious video evidence that the
runner was not out of bounds; or
b. forcibly hitting a defenseless player’s head or neck area, and there is clear and obvious video evidence that
the defender did not make any contact with the defenseless player’s head or neck area;
4. twisting, pulling or turning the facemask or helmet opening, and there is clear and obvious video evidence that the
player did not make any contact with the hand to the opponent’s facemask or helmet opening;
5. a horse-collar tackle, and there is clear and obvious video evidence that the player did not contact the inside collar
of the back or the side of the opponent’s shoulder pads or jersey with the hand, or contact the jersey at the name
plate or above with the hand;
6. tripping, and there is clear and obvious video evidence that the player’s leg or foot did not contact the opponent; or
7. roughing or running into the kicker, and there is clear and obvious video evidence that the defender who contacted
the kicker touched the kick in flight.
Nothing in this Article precludes a head coach or Replay Official from initiating a challenge or review otherwise allowed under Rule
15, Section 1.