RULE 8 FORWARD PASS, BACKWARD PASS, FUMBLE
SECTION 1 FORWARD PASS
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is a forward pass if:
(a) the ball initially moves forward (to a point nearer the opponent’s goal line) after leaving the passer’s hand(s);
(b) the ball first strikes the ground, a player, an official, or anything else at a point that is nearer the opponent’s goal line than the
point at which the ball leaves the passer’s hand(s); or
(c) a ball is intentionally fumbled and goes forward.
Item 1. Forward Movement of Hand. When a player is in control of the ball and is attempting to pass it forward, any intentional
forward movement of his hand starts a forward pass.
(a) If contact by an opponent materially affects a passer after the passer begins his throwing motion, it is a forward pass if he
passes the ball, regardless of where the ball strikes the ground, a player, an official, or anything else. When this occurs,
intentional grounding rules do not apply.
(b) When a passer intends to throw a forward pass and is contacted by an opponent before beginning his throwing motion, the
direction of the pass is the responsibility of the passer if he passes the ball, and intentional grounding rules apply.
(c) If, after an intentional forward movement of his hand, the passer loses possession of the ball during an attempt to bring it
back toward his body, it is a fumble.
(d) If the passer loses possession of the ball while attempting to re-cock his arm, it is a fumble.
ARTICLE 2. LEGAL FORWARD PASS. The offensive team may make one forward pass from behind the line during each down.
If the ball, whether in player possession or loose, crosses the line of scrimmage, a forward pass is not permissible, regardless of
whether the ball returns behind the line of scrimmage before the pass is thrown.
Item 1. Illegal Passes. Any other forward pass by either team is illegal and is a foul by the passing team, including:
(a) a forward pass thrown when the passer’s entire body and the ball are beyond the line of scrimmage when the ball is released,
whether the passer is airborne or touching the ground.
(b) A second forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage.
(c) A forward pass thrown after the ball has crossed the line of scrimmage and has returned behind it.
(d) A forward pass thrown after there has been a change of possession.
Item 2. Intercepted Illegal Pass. If an illegal pass is caught or intercepted, the ball may be advanced, and the penalty declined.
Penalties:
(a) For a forward pass from beyond the line: Loss of down and five yards from the spot where the ball is released.
(b) For a second forward pass from behind the line, or for a forward pass that was thrown after the ball returned behind
the line: Loss of down and five yards from the previous spot.
(c) For a forward pass that is thrown after a change of possession: Loss of five yards from where the ball is released.
Notes:
(1) Eligibility, pass interference, and intentional grounding rules apply when a forward pass is thrown from behind the line,
regardless of whether the pass is an illegal forward pass. Eligibility, pass interference, and intentional grounding rules do
not apply if a forward pass is thrown (a) from beyond the line, (b) on a free kick play, (c) on a fair catch kick play, or (d)
after a change of possession.
(2) Roughing the passer rules apply on all passes (legal or illegal) thrown from behind the line of scrimmage (12-2-11). If a
pass is thrown from beyond the line of scrimmage, unnecessary roughness may apply for action against the passer.
ARTICLE 3. COMPLETED OR INTERCEPTED PASS. A player who makes a catch may advance the ball. A forward pass is
complete (by the offense) or intercepted (by the defense) in the field of play, at the sideline, or in the end zone if a player, who is
inbounds:
(a) secures control of the ball in his hands or arms prior to the ball touching the ground; and
(b) touches the ground inbounds with both feet or with any part of his body other than his hands; and
(c) after (a) and (b) have been fulfilled, clearly performs any act common to the game (e.g., extend the ball forward, take an
additional step, tuck the ball away and turn upfield, or avoid or ward off an opponent), or he maintains control of the ball long
enough to do so.
Notes:
(1) Movement of the ball does not automatically result in loss of control.
(2) If a player, who satisfied (a) and (b), but has not satisfied (c), contacts the ground and loses control of the ball, it is an
incomplete pass if the ball hits the ground before he regains control, or if he regains control out of bounds.
(3) A receiver is considered a player in a defenseless posture (See Rule 12, Section 2, Article 9) throughout the entire
process of the catch and until the player is capable of avoiding or warding off the impending contact of an opponent.
(4) If a pass is caught simultaneously by two eligible opponents, and both players retain it, the ball belongs to the passers.
It is not a simultaneous catch if a player gains control first and an opponent subsequently gains joint control. If the ball is
muffed after simultaneous touching by two such players, all the players of the passing team become eligible to catch the
loose ball.
(5) If a player, who is in control of the ball, is held up and carried out of bounds by an opponent before both feet or any part
of his body other than his hands touches the ground inbounds, it is a completed or intercepted pass. It is not necessary
for the player to maintain control of the ball when he lands out of bounds.
(6) If any part of the foot hits out of bounds during the normal continuous motion of taking a step (heel-toe or toe-heel) then
the foot is out of bounds. A player is inbounds if he drags his foot, or if there is a delay between the heel-toe or toe-heel
touching the ground.
ARTICLE 4. INCOMPLETE PASS. An incomplete pass is a loss of down, and the ball returns to the previous spot. Any forward
pass (legal or illegal) is incomplete and the ball is dead immediately if:
(a) The process of the catch in 8-1-3 is not completed;
(b) The ball goes out of bounds; or
(c) A player is the first to touch a pass after having been out of bounds, but prior to reestablishing himself inbounds with both feet
or any body part other than his hands. There is not a foul for illegal touching.
ARTICLE 5. ELIGIBLE RECEIVERS. The following players are eligible to catch a forward pass that is thrown from behind the
line of scrimmage:
(a) Defensive players;
(b) Offensive players who are on either end of the line, provided they either have the numbers of eligible players (0–49 and 80–
89) or have legally reported to play a position on the end of the line. See 5-1-2;
(c) Offensive players who are legally at least one yard behind the line at the snap, provided they either have the numbers of
eligible players (0–49 and 80–89) or have legally reported to play a position in the backfield;
(d) All offensive players after the ball has been touched by any defensive player or any eligible offensive player; or
(e) An eligible receiver who is forced out of bounds by an opponent’s foul, provided he attempts to return inbounds immediately
and reestablishes inbounds with both feet or with any body part other than his hands, without prior touching.
ARTICLE 6. INELIGIBLE RECEIVERS. All offensive players other than those identified in Article 5 above are ineligible to catch
a legal or illegal forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage, including:
(a) Players who are not on either end of their line or at least one yard behind it when the ball is snapped;
(b) Players who fail to notify the Referee of being eligible as required by Article 5;
(c) An eligible receiver who has been out of bounds prior to or during a pass, either by his own volition or by being legally forced
out, even if he has reestablished himself inbounds with both feet or with any part of his body other than his hands; or
(d) A player who takes his stance as a T-Formation Quarterback unless, before the ball is snapped, he legally moves to a position
at least one yard behind the line of scrimmage or on the end of the line and is stationary in that position for at least one second
before the snap.
ARTICLE 7. LEGAL TOUCHING. A forward pass (legal or illegal) thrown from behind the line may be touched by any eligible
player. A pass in flight may be tipped, batted, or deflected in any direction by any eligible player at any time, including such a pass
in the end zone.
ARTICLE 8. ILLEGAL TOUCHING OF A FORWARD PASS. It is a foul for illegal touching if a forward pass (legal or illegal)
thrown from behind the line of scrimmage:
(a) is first touched intentionally or is caught by an originally ineligible offensive player. If such a pass is caught, it is a live ball; or
Penalty: For illegal touching of a forward pass: Loss of five yards at the previous spot.
(b) first touches or is caught by an eligible offensive receiver who has gone out of bounds, either of his own volition or by being
legally forced out of bounds and has reestablished himself inbounds. If such a pass is caught, it is a live ball.
Penalty: For illegal touching of a forward pass after being out of bounds: Loss of down at the previous spot.
SECTION 2 INTENTIONAL GROUNDING
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is a foul for intentional grounding if a passer, facing an imminent loss of yardage because of pressure
from the defense, throws a forward pass that is not in the direction and vicinity of an originally eligible offensive receiver. The pass
does not have to be incomplete for intentional grounding to apply.
Item 1. Passer or Ball Outside Pocket Area. Intentional grounding will not be called when a passer, who is outside, or has been
outside, the pocket area, throws a forward pass that lands at or beyond the line of scrimmage extended (including when the ball
lands out of bounds over the sideline or endline), even if no offensive player(s) have a realistic chance to catch the ball. If a loose
ball leaves the pocket area, this area no longer exists; if the ball is recovered, all intentional grounding rules apply as if the passer
is outside pocket area. A passer is out of the pocket area if any part of his body or the ball is outside the pocket area.
Item 2. Physical Contact. Intentional grounding should not be called if:
(a) the passer initiates his passing motion toward an eligible receiver and then is significantly affected by physical contact from a
defensive player that causes the pass to land in an area that is not in the direction and vicinity of an eligible receiver; or
(b) the passer is out of the pocket area, and his passing motion is significantly affected by physical contact from a defensive
player that causes the ball to land short of the line of scrimmage.
Item 3. Stopping Clock. A T-Formation Quarterback is permitted to stop the game clock legally to conserve time if, immediately
upon receiving the snap, he begins a continuous throwing motion and throws the ball directly into the ground.
Item 4. Delayed Spike. A passer, after delaying his passing action for strategic purposes, is prohibited from throwing the ball to
the ground in front of him, even if he is under no pressure from defensive rusher(s).
Penalty: For intentional grounding:
(a) loss of down and 10 yards from the previous spot; or
(b) loss of down at the spot of the pass if the spot is more than 10 yards from the previous spot or more than half the
distance to the goal line; or
(c) a safety if the passer’s entire body and the ball are in his end zone when the ball is thrown. See 4-7 for actions that
conserve time inside two minutes of either half.
SECTION 3 INELIGIBLE PLAYER DOWNFIELD
ARTICLE 1. LEGAL AND ILLEGAL ACTS. On a scrimmage play during which a legal forward pass is thrown, it is a foul if the
entire body of an ineligible offensive player, including a T-Formation Quarterback, is more than one yard beyond the line of
scrimmage before the pass has been thrown.
Item 1. Legally Downfield. An ineligible player is not illegally downfield if, after initiating contact with an opponent within one yard
of the line of scrimmage during his initial charge:
(a) he moves more than one yard beyond the line while legally blocking or being blocked by an opponent;
(b) after breaking legal contact with an opponent more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, he remains stationary, moves
laterally, or moves toward his own goal line until a forward pass is thrown; or
(c) after losing legal contact with an opponent more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, he is forced behind the line of
scrimmage by an opponent, at which time he is again subject to normal blocking restrictions for an ineligible offensive player.
Note: If an ineligible offensive player moves beyond the line while legally blocking or being blocked by an opponent, an
eligible offensive player may catch a pass between them and the line of scrimmage.
Item 2. Illegally Downfield. An ineligible offensive player is illegally downfield if:
(a) his entire body is more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage without contacting an opponent;
(b) after losing contact with an opponent within one yard of the line of scrimmage, he advances so his entire body is more than
one yard beyond the line of scrimmage; or
(c) after losing contact with an opponent with his entire body more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, he continues to
move toward his opponent’s goal line.
Penalty: For ineligible offensive player downfield: Loss of five yards from the previous spot.
ARTICLE 2. AFTER PASS IS THROWN. After the ball leaves the passer’s hand, ineligible pass receivers can advance more
than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, or beyond the position reached by their initial charge, provided that they do not block
or contact a defensive player, who is more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, until the ball is touched by a player of
either team. Such prior blocking and/or contact is pass interference if it occurs in the vicinity of where the ball is thrown. See 8-3-
1-Note above for exception when blocker maintains continuous contact.
SECTION 4 LEGAL AND ILLEGAL CONTACT WITH ELIGIBLE RECEIVERS
ARTICLE 1. LEGAL CONTACT WITHIN FIVE YARDS. Within the area five yards beyond the line of scrimmage, a defensive
player may chuck an eligible receiver in front of him. The defender is allowed to maintain continuous and unbroken contact within
the five-yard zone, so long as the receiver has not moved beyond a point that is even with the defender.
ARTICLE 2. ILLEGAL CONTACT WITHIN FIVE YARDS. Within the five-yard zone, if the player who receives the snap remains
in the pocket area with the ball, a defender may not make initial contact in the back of a receiver, nor may he maintain contact
after the receiver has moved beyond a point that is even with the defender. If a defender contacts a receiver within the five-yard
zone, loses contact, and then contacts him again within the five-yard zone, it is a foul for illegal contact.
ARTICLE 3. ILLEGAL CONTACT BEYOND FIVE-YARD ZONE. Beyond the five-yard zone, if the player who receives the snap
remains in the pocket area with the ball, a defender cannot initiate contact with a receiver who is attempting to evade him. A
defender may use his hands or arms only to defend or protect himself against impending contact caused by a receiver. If a
defender contacts a receiver within the five-yard zone and maintains contact with him, he must release the receiver as they exit
the five-yard zone.
ARTICLE 4. INCIDENTAL CONTACT BEYOND FIVE-YARD ZONE. Beyond the five-yard zone, incidental contact may exist
between receiver and defender.
Penalty: For illegal contact by the defense: Loss of five yards and automatic first down.
ARTICLE 5. ILLEGAL CUT BLOCK. It is an illegal cut block if:
(a) an eligible receiver who takes a position more than two yards outside of his own tackle (flexed receiver) is blocked below the
waist at, behind, or beyond the line of scrimmage; or
(b) an eligible receiver who is lined up within two yards of the tackle, whether on or behind the line, is blocked below the waist
after he goes beyond the line of scrimmage (such players may be blocked below the waist at or behind the line of scrimmage).
Penalty: For illegal cut block: Loss of 15 yards and automatic first down.
ARTICLE 6. DEFENSIVE HOLDING. It is defensive holding if a player grasps an eligible offensive player (or his jersey) with his
hands, or extends an arm or arms to cut off or encircle him. See 12-1-6. Any offensive player who pretends to possess the ball,
and/or one to whom a teammate pretends to give the ball, may be tackled until he leaves the pocket area.
Penalty: For holding by the defense: Loss of five yards and automatic first down.
ARTICLE 7. END OF RESTRICTIONS. If the quarterback or the receiver of the snap demonstrates no further intention to pass
the ball (i.e., hands off or pitches the ball to another player, throws a forward or backward pass, loses possession of the ball by a
muff that touches the ground or a fumble, or if he is tackled) the restrictions on the defensive team prohibiting illegal contact, or
an illegal cut block, against an eligible receiver will end, and a defensive player is permitted to use his hands, arms, or body to
push, pull, or ward off an offensive receiver, pursuant to Rule 12, Section 1, Article 5. If the quarterback leaves the pocket area
with the ball in his possession, the restrictions on illegal contact and an illegal cut block both end, but the restriction on defensive
holding remains in effect.
If a team presents a punt formation (3-17-7), defensive acts that normally constitute illegal contact (chuck beyond five yards, etc.)
are permitted, provided that the acts do not constitute defensive holding.
SECTION 5 PASS INTERFERENCE
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is pass interference by either team when any act by a player more than one yard beyond the line of
scrimmage significantly hinders an eligible player’s opportunity to catch the ball. Pass interference can only occur when a forward
pass is thrown from behind the line of scrimmage, regardless of whether the pass is legal or illegal, or whether it crosses the line.
When the ball is in the air, eligible offensive and defensive receivers have the same right to the path of the ball and are subject to
the same restrictions.
Acts that do not occur more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage are not pass interference but could be offensive or
defensive holding (see 12-1-3 and 12-1-6).
Defensive pass interference rules apply from the time the ball is thrown until the ball is touched. See Article 2 for prohibited acts
while the ball is in the air.
Offensive pass interference rules apply from the time the ball is snapped until the ball is touched. See Article 2 for prohibited acts
while the ball is in the air and Article 4 for prohibited acts prior to the pass.
ARTICLE 2. PROHIBITED ACTS BY BOTH TEAMS WHILE THE BALL IS IN THE AIR. Acts that are pass interference include,
but are not limited to:
(a) Contact by a player who is not playing the ball that restricts the opponent’s opportunity to make the catch;
(b) Playing through the back of an opponent in an attempt to make a play on the ball;
(c) Grabbing an opponent’s arm(s) in such a manner that restricts his opportunity to catch a pass;
(d) Extending an arm across the body of an opponent, thus restricting his ability to catch a pass, and regardless of whether the
player committing such act is playing the ball;
(e) Cutting off the path of an opponent by making contact with him, without playing the ball;
(f) Hooking an opponent in an attempt to get to the ball in such a manner that it causes the opponent’s body to turn prior to the
ball arriving; or
(g) Initiating contact with an opponent by shoving or pushing off, thus creating separation.
ARTICLE 3. PERMISSIBLE ACTS BY BOTH TEAMS WHILE THE BALL IS IN THE AIR. Acts that are permissible by a player
include, but are not limited to:
(a) Incidental contact by an opponent’s hands, arms, or body when both players are competing for the ball, or neither player is
looking for the ball. If there is any question whether contact is incidental, the ruling shall be no interference;
(b) Inadvertent tangling of feet when both players are playing the ball or neither player is playing the ball;
(c) Contact that would normally be considered pass interference, but the pass is clearly uncatchable by the involved players,
except as specified in 8-3-2 and 8-5-4 pertaining to blocking downfield by the offense;
(d) Laying a hand on an opponent that does not restrict him in an attempt to make a play on the ball;
(e) Contact by a player who has gained position on an opponent in an attempt to catch the ball; or
(f) When a team presents a punt formation (3-17-7) and before the ball is kicked, acts that normally constitute pass interference
against the end man on the line of scrimmage or against an eligible receiver behind the line of scrimmage, who is aligned or
in motion more than one yard outside the end man on the line. Defensive holding and offensive pass interference rules still
apply.
ARTICLE 4. OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS BY THE OFFENSE. Acts that are pass interference include:
(a) Blocking more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage by an offensive player prior to a pass being thrown. See 8-3-1-
Note for exception for an ineligible offensive player; or
(b) Blocking a defender beyond the line while the pass is in the air if the block occurs in the vicinity of the player to whom the
pass is thrown. See 8-3-1-Note for exception for ineligible players.
Penalty: For pass interference by the defense: First down for the offensive team at the spot of the foul. If the interference
is also a personal foul (12-2), the penalty for such a foul is also enforced, either from the spot of the foul (for interference),
or from the end of the run if the foul for pass interference is declined. If the spot of the interference is behind the defensive
team’s goal line and the previous spot was on or outside the defense’s two-yard line, then, it is first down for the offensive
team on the defense’s one-yard line at the inbounds spot corresponding to the spot of the interference, or, if the previous
spot was inside the defense’s two-yard line, the penalty shall be halfway between the previous spot and the goal line,
and it is first down for the offensive team.
Penalty: For pass interference by the offense: Loss of 10 yards from the previous spot.
SECTION 6 ENFORCEMENT SPOT
ARTICLE 1. ENFORCEMENT SPOT. If there is a foul by either team from the time of the snap until a forward pass thrown from
behind the line ends, the penalty is enforced from the previous spot. A pass play ends and a running play begins at the instant
that a pass is caught.
Exceptions:
(a) Intentional grounding is a loss of down at the spot of the foul, or a loss of down and a 10-yard penalty from the previous
spot, whichever is less beneficial for the offense. If the foul occurs less than 10 yards behind the line of
scrimmage, but more than half the distance to the goal line, the ball shall be placed at the spot of the pass. (If the
pass is thrown from the end zone, it is a safety).
(b) Pass interference by the defense is enforced from the spot of the foul. If the spot of the interference is behind the
defensive team’s goal line and the previous spot was on or outside the defense’s two-yard line, then it is first down for
the offensive team on the defense’s one-yard line at the inbounds spot corresponding to the spot of the interference, or,
if the previous spot was inside the defense’s two-yard line, the penalty shall be halfway between the previous spot and
the goal line, and it is first down for the offensive team. See Rule 8, Section 5, Penalty.
(c) It is a safety when the offensive team commits a foul behind its own goal line if the defense elects to enforce the penalty
at that spot.
(d) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the defense prior to completion of a forward pass thrown
from behind the line, enforcement is from the previous spot or the dead ball spot, whichever is more beneficial to the
offense. If the play results in a score for the offense, enforcement is on the Try. If the passing team is fouled and
subsequently loses possession after a completion, the passing team retains possession of the ball, and
enforcement is from the previous spot.
(e) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense prior to the offense losing possession during
a pass play or a subsequent running play, enforcement is from the dead ball spot. However, if
the defense subsequently loses possession, the penalty is enforced from the spot of the defense's catch or recovery,
and the defense retains possession. This also applies to a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the
offense prior to a forward pass thrown from behind the line when the offense fails to make the line to gain.
Notes:
(1) The penalty for a forward pass from behind the line after the ball has been beyond the line, or for a second forward pass
from behind the line, is enforced from the previous spot, unless the spot of the pass is behind the passer’s goal line, in
which case it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot, or the 35-yard line or 20-yard line (as
applicable) if the impetus was from a free kick.
(2) If a forward pass is thrown from beyond the line of scrimmage, or when there is no line of scrimmage, it is a foul during
a running play.
SECTION 7 BACKWARD PASS AND FUMBLE
ARTICLE 1. BACKWARD PASS. A runner may throw a backward pass at any time (3-21-4). Players of either team may advance
after catching a backward pass, or recovering a backward pass after it touches the ground. Any snap from center is a backward
pass.
ARTICLE 2. BACKWARD PASS OUT OF BOUNDS. If a backward pass goes out of bounds between the goal lines, the ball is
dead (7-6-2-a), and it is next put in play at the inbounds spot. Rule 11 governs if a backward pass is declared dead behind the
goal line. During a play that starts after the two-minute warning of either half, if a backward pass goes out of bounds before a
change of possession, it is an action that conserves time (4-7-1).
Penalty: For a backward pass out of bounds before a change of possession during a play that starts after the two-minute
warning. Loss of down and 5 yards.
ARTICLE 3. FUMBLE. A fumble is any act, other than a pass or kick, which results in a loss of player possession.
Exception: If a runner intentionally fumbles forward, it is a forward pass (3-2-5-Note).
Item 1. Recovery and Advance. Any player of either team may recover or catch a fumble and advance, either before or after the
ball strikes the ground, unless the fumble occurs on fourth down (See 8-7-5 below), after the two-minute warning, or during a Try
(See 8-7-6 below).
Item 2. Legal Recovery. For a legal recovery of a fumble, see 3-2-7.
Item 3. Out of Bounds in the Field of Play. When a fumble goes out of bounds between the goal lines, the following shall apply:
(a) If a fumble goes backward and out of bounds, the ball is next put in play at the inbounds spot by the team that was last in
possession;
(b) If a fumble goes forward and out of bounds, the ball is next put in play at the spot of the fumble by the team that was last in
possession;
(c) If a ball is fumbled in a team’s own end zone and goes forward into the field of play and out of bounds, it will result in a safety,
if that team provided the impetus that put the ball into the end zone (See 11-5-1 for exception for momentum). If the impetus
was provided by the opponent, the play will result in a touchback; or
(d) Notwithstanding any of the above, when there has not been a change of possession during the down, and the spot of the ball
is not at or beyond the line to gain after fourth down, the ball is awarded to Team B at the spot that the ball is declared dead.
Item 4. Out of Bounds in End Zone. When a fumble goes out of bounds in the end zone, the following shall apply:
(a) If a ball is fumbled in the field of play, and goes forward into the opponent’s end zone and over the end line or sideline, a
touchback is awarded to the defensive team; or
(b) If a ball is fumbled in a team’s own end zone or in the field of play and goes out of bounds in the end zone, it is a safety, if
that team provided the impetus that sent the ball into the end zone (See 11-5-1 for exception for momentum). If the impetus
was provided by the opponent, it is a touchback.
ARTICLE 4. HANDING BALL FORWARD. No player may hand the ball forward except to an eligible receiver who is behind the
line of scrimmage.
(a) Loss of player possession by unsuccessful execution of attempted handing is a fumble charged to the player that last had
possession.
(b) A muffed handoff (legal or illegal) is a fumble, and the ball remains alive.
Penalties:
(a) For handing ball forward beyond the line of scrimmage: Loss of down and five yards from spot of the foul.
(b) For handing ball forward to an ineligible receiver behind the line of scrimmage: Loss of down and five yards
from the previous spot.
(c) For handing ball forward after a change of possession: Loss of five yards from the spot of the foul.
ARTICLE 5. FOURTH DOWN FUMBLE. If a fourth down fumble occurs during a play from scrimmage:
(a) The ball may be advanced by any member of the defensive team.
(b) The player who fumbled is the only Team A player permitted to recover and advance the ball prior to a change of possession.
(c) If, prior to a change of a possession, the recovery or catch is by a teammate of the player who fumbled, the ball is dead, and
the spot of the next snap is the spot of the fumble, or the spot of the recovery if the spot of the recovery is behind the spot of
the fumble.
ARTICLE 6. FUMBLE AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING OR DURING A TRY. If a fumble by either team occurs after the twominute
warning or during a Try:
(a) The ball may be advanced by any opponent.
(b) The player who fumbled is the only player of his team who is permitted to recover and advance the ball.
(c) If the recovery or catch is by a teammate of the player who fumbled, the ball is dead, and the spot of the next snap is the spot
of the fumble, or the spot of the recovery if the spot of the recovery is behind the spot of the fumble.
ARTICLE 7. ENFORCEMENT SPOT DURING A BACKWARD PASS OR FUMBLE. If there is a foul by either team during a
backward pass or fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or fumble. The three-and-one method of enforcement
is used (see Rule 14, Section 3, Article 6).
(a) When the spot of the backward pass or fumble is beyond the line of scrimmage, or when there is not a line of scrimmage,
and there is a foul during the backward pass or fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or the spot of the
fumble. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used. See 14-3-6.
(b) When the spot of a backward pass or fumble is behind the line of scrimmage, all fouls committed by either team, including a
foul by Team B in Team A’s end zone, are enforced from the previous spot, except a foul by the offense in its end zone is a
safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.
(c) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense during a fumble or backward pass that is recovered
by the defense, enforcement is from the dead ball spot. If the recovering team subsequently loses possession, the penalty is
enforced from the spot of its recovery, and it retains possession. This also applies to a personal foul or unsportsmanlike
conduct foul by the offense during a fumble or backward pass that is recovered by the offense, and the offense fails to make
the line to gain.
Notes:
(1) If Team B gains possession in its end zone, and the impetus was by Team A, if Team B fumbles or throws a
backward pass in the end zone, and fouls while the ball is loose, the spot of the fumble or the backward pass is
considered to be the B20-yard line, or the B35-yard line or B20-yard line (as applicable) if the impetus was from a
free kick.
(2) If a Team B player’s original momentum carries him into his end zone, where he fumbles the ball, the spot of the fumble
is considered to be the spot at which the player established possession. See 11-5-1-Exc. 2.