RULE 11 SCORING
SECTION 1 VALUE OF SCORES
ARTICLE 1. WINNING TEAM. The team that scores the greater number of points during the entire game is the winner. If a team
forfeits a game, the opponent will be declared the winner by a score of 2-0, but the points will not be added to the winning team’s
record for purposes of offensive production or tiebreakers.
ARTICLE 2. TYPES OF SCORING PLAYS. Points are scored as follows:
(a) Touchdown: 6 points
(b) Field goal: 3 points
(c) Safety: 2 points
(d) Try after touchdown: 1 point (field goal or safety) or 2 points (touchdown)
SECTION 2 TOUCHDOWN
ARTICLE 1. TOUCHDOWN PLAYS. A touchdown is scored, and the ball becomes dead when:
(a) The ball is on, above, or behind the plane of the opponent’s goal line (extended) and is in possession of a runner who has
advanced from the field of play into the end zone.
(b) A ball in possession of an airborne runner is on, above, or behind the plane of the goal line, and some part of the ball passed
over or inside the pylon.
(c) A ball in player possession touches the pylon, provided that, after contact by an opponent, no part of the player’s body, except
his hands or feet, struck the ground before the ball touched the pylon.
(d) Any player who is legally inbounds secures possession of a loose ball that is on, above, or behind the opponent’s goal line
(3-2-4 and 3-2-7).
(e) The Referee awards a touchdown to a team that has been denied one by a palpably unfair act.
SECTION 3 TRY
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL RULES. After a touchdown, a Try is an opportunity for either team to score one or two additional points
during one scrimmage down subject to 4-8-2-c.
The Try begins when the Referee sounds the whistle for play to start. The game clock will not run during the Try. The team that
scored the touchdown shall put the ball in play:
(a) anywhere on or between the inbound lines;
(b) 15 yards from the defensive team’s goal line for a Try kick; or
(c) two yards from the defensive team’s goal line for a Try by pass or run.
After the ball has been declared ready for play, the offensive team may change its choice for any of the above if there is a penalty
or charged timeout by either team.
ARTICLE 2. RESULTS OF A TRY. During a Try, the following shall apply:
(a) If a kick results in a field goal by the offense, one point is awarded. An artificial or manufactured tee shall not be permitted to
assist in the execution of a Try kick. (The conditions of 11-4-1 must be met).
(b) If a Try results in a touchdown by either team, two points are awarded.
(c) If the Try results in what would ordinarily be a safety against either team, one point is awarded to the opponent.
(d) If any play results in a touchback, the Try is unsuccessful, and there shall be no replay.
(e) The Try ends when either team scores or the ball is dead by rule.
ARTICLE 3. FOULS COMMITTED DURING TRY.
If a foul results in a re-Try, Team A will have the option to enforce the penalty from the spot where it attempted the Try (previous
spot) or from the yard line for the other Try option, the location of which is determined by any previously enforced penalty, if
applicable.
Exception: Defensive pass interference is a spot foul. If the foul is in the end zone, the ball will be placed on the defense’s
one-yard line, or half the distance to the goal, whichever is more advantageous to Team A. In addition, Team A may have the
penalty enforced half the distance from the other Try spot.
Item 1. Fouls Before the Signal. If there is a foul by either team after a touchdown and before the ready for play signal, it is
enforced on the Try.
Item 2. Fouls Before the Snap. If there is a foul by either team which causes a play to be whistled dead prior to the snap, it shall
be treated the same as if it had occurred prior to a scrimmage play. If a foul by the defense prevents the attempt of a Try, the
offensive team has the option to have the distance penalty assessed on the next Try or on the ensuing kickoff.
Item 3. Fouls by Team A. The following applies if there is a foul by Team A:
(a) If the foul is during a successful Try, the Try shall be repeated, unless the penalty results in a loss of down.
(b) If the penalty for a foul results in a loss of down, the Try is unsuccessful, and there shall be no replay.
(c) All fouls committed after a change of possession will result in a distance penalty being assessed on the ensuing kickoff,
provided the penalty does not offset with another penalty or negate a successful Try.
(d) All personal or unsportsmanlike conduct fouls will result in a distance penalty being assessed on the ensuing kickoff, provided
the penalty does not offset with another penalty or negate a successful Try.
(e) If the foul results in a safety, Team B is awarded one point.
Item 4. Fouls by Team B. The following applies if there is a foul by Team B:
(a) All fouls, except for defensive pass interference, will result in the distance penalty being assessed on the ensuing kickoff,
provided the penalty does not offset with another penalty, create a re-Try, or negate a score by Team B.
(b) If the foul results in a safety, Team A is awarded one point.
(c) If the foul is during an unsuccessful try, Team A may decline the distance penalty, and the down is replayed.
Item 5. Fouls by Both Teams with No Change of Possession. If there are fouls by both teams during a Try in which there is
not a change of possession, the Try must be replayed (14-5-1), unless the scoring team’s only foul is a dead ball foul after a score.
Item 6. Fouls by Both Teams with Change of Possession. If both teams foul during a Try in which there is a change or changes
of possession, the following shall apply:
(a) If both teams foul before the first change of possession, the Try shall be repeated.
(b) If Team B fouls before the first change of possession, the Try shall be repeated.
(c) If Team A fouls before the first change of possession, the Try shall be deemed to have failed.
(d) If neither team fouls before the first change of possession, and both teams subsequently commit fouls, the Try shall be
deemed to have failed.
Item 7. Fouls After a Try. If there is a foul by either team after a Try, it is enforced on the succeeding free kick. If there are fouls
by both teams, normal enforcement rules apply.
ARTICLE 4. KICKOFF AFTER TRY. After a Try, the team on defense during the Try shall receive the succeeding free kick (6-1-
1-a).
SECTION 4 FIELD GOAL
ARTICLE 1. SUCCESSFUL FIELD GOAL. A field goal is scored when all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The kick must be a place kick or drop kick made by the offense from on or behind the line of scrimmage or from the spot of a
fair catch (fair catch kick). If a fair catch is made or awarded outside the inbounds line, the spot of the kick is the nearest
inbounds line.
(b) After the ball is kicked, it must not touch the ground or any player of the offensive team before it passes through the goal.
(c) The entire ball must pass through the vertical plane of the goal, which is the area above the crossbar and between the uprights
or, if above the uprights, between their outside edges. If the ball passes through the goal, and returns through the goal without
striking the ground or some object or person beyond the goal, the attempt is unsuccessful.
ARTICLE 2. MISSED FIELD GOALS. If there is a missed field goal attempt that crosses the line of scrimmage, and the ball has
not been touched by the receivers beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play, or in the end zone before the ball has touched
the ground in the end zone, the following shall apply:
(a) If the spot of the kick was inside the receivers’ 20-yard line, it is the receivers’ ball at the 20-yard line; or
(b) If the spot of the kick was from the receivers’ 20-yard line or beyond the receivers’ 20-yard line, it is the receivers’ ball at the
spot of the kick.
Exceptions:
The special rules pertaining to field goals in (a) and (b) are not applicable, and all general rules for a scrimmage kick will apply
when there is a missed field goal and:
(1) the ball is touched by the receivers beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play or in the end zone before the ball
has become dead; or
(2) the scrimmage kick ends behind the line of scrimmage, and the ball has not been touched by the receivers beyond the
line of scrimmage.
Note: If a foul occurs during an unsuccessful field goal attempt in (1) or (2) above, Rule 14-4-8 governs.
SUPPLEMENTAL NOTES:
(1) If the receivers do not touch the ball beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play or in the end zone, the ball is dead
as soon as it touches the ground in the end zone, and it is the receivers’ ball at the spot of the kick, or at the 20-yard line
if the attempt was from inside the 20-yard line.
(2) If the ball goes out of bounds after it is first touched by the receivers beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play, it
is the receivers’ ball at the out of bounds spot.
(3) If the receivers first touch the ball beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play or in the end zone, and the kickers
recover, the ball belongs to the kickers at the spot of recovery. If the recovery is in the end zone, it is a touchdown.
(4) If the receivers first touch the ball beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play, and without any new impetus, the ball
rolls into the end zone where it is declared dead in the possession of the receivers, it is a touchback.
(5) For a successful field goal, or for an unsuccessful attempt that does not land in the field of play, the maximum amount of
time that can run off the game clock is five seconds.
ARTICLE 3. FAIR CATCH KICK. The rules for a field goal attempt from scrimmage apply to a field goal attempt following a fair
catch (a fair catch kick).
Exceptions:
(1) The fair catch kick line for the kicking team is the yard line through the most forward point from which the ball is kicked.
(2) The fair catch kick line for the receiving team is the yard line 10 yards in advance of the kicking team’s fair catch kick
line.
(3) Though this is not a free kick, the rules for onside free kick formation apply (6-1-6).
Note: The kicking team cannot possess the ball unless it has first been touched by the receivers.
ARTICLE 4. NO TEE. An artificial or manufactured tee shall not be permitted to assist in the execution of a field goal or Try kick
attempt.
ARTICLE 5. FOREIGN ARTICLES. No article of any type may be placed on the field, or used in any manner, to assist a player
in the execution of a field goal or Try kick attempt. Nothing other than a hand or finger may be used to mark the spot or the vicinity
of a kick or hold.
ARTICLE 6. BALL NEXT IN PLAY. After a field goal, the team scored upon will receive the succeeding free kick (6-1-1-a).
SECTION 5 SAFETY
ARTICLE 1. SAFETY. It is a safety:
(a) when the offense commits a foul behind its own goal line and the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot (see also
14-2-2-b); or
(b) when an impetus by a team sends the ball behind its own goal line, and the ball is dead in the end zone in its possession, or
the ball is out of bounds behind the goal line.
Exceptions:
It is not a safety:
(1) If a forward pass from behind the line of scrimmage is incomplete in the end zone.
(2) If a defensive player, in the field of play, intercepts a pass or catches or recovers a fumble, backward pass, scrimmage
kick, free kick, or fair catch kick, and his original momentum carries him into his end zone where the ball is declared dead
in his team’s possession. The ball belongs to the defensive team at the spot where the player’s foot or other body part
touched the ground to establish possession. If that spot is in the end zone, the result of the play is a touchback, even if
the ball is not on, above, or beyond the goal line (11-6-1).
(a) If a player of the team which intercepts, catches, or recovers the ball commits a live ball foul in the end zone, it is a
safety.
(b) If a player who intercepts, catches, or recovers the ball throws a completed or intercepted illegal forward pass from
the end zone, the ball remains alive. If his opponent intercepts the illegal pass and scores, it is a touchdown.
(c) If a player of the team which intercepts, catches, or recovers the ball commits a foul in the field of play, and the ball
becomes dead in the end zone, the basic spot is the spot of the change of possession.
(d) If the spot where possession changed is inside the one-yard line, the ball is to be spotted at the one-yard line.
Notes:
(1) A ball in the end zone which is carried toward the field of play is still in the end zone until the entire ball is in the field of
play (3-11-4).
(2) The impetus is always attributed to the offense, unless the defense creates a new force that sends the ball behind its
own goal line by muffing a ball which is at rest or nearly at rest, or by batting or kicking any loose ball (3-16).
ARTICLE 2. BALL IN PLAY AFTER SAFETY. After a safety, the team scored upon must put the ball in play by a free kick (punt,
drop kick, or place kick) from its 20-yard line, unless an extension exception applies (4-8-2-g). An artificial or manufactured tee
may be used. See 6-1-1-b and 6-1-3.
SECTION 6 TOUCHBACK
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is a touchback if the ball is dead on or behind the goal line a team is defending, provided that the
impetus comes from an opponent, and that it is not a touchdown or an incomplete forward pass. A ball in the end zone which is
carried toward the field of play is still in the end zone until the entire ball is in the field of play (3-11-4).
ARTICLE 2. TOUCHBACK SITUATIONS. When a team provides the impetus (3-16) that sends a loose ball behind its opponent’s
goal line, it is a touchback:
(a) if the ball is dead in the opponent’s possession in its end zone;
(b) if the ball is out of bounds behind the goal line (see 8-7-3-Item 4-a) including if the ball hits the pylon;
(c) if a scrimmage kick has not been touched by a player of the receiving team beyond the line of scrimmage, and the ball:
(1) touches the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line;
(2) touches a player of the kicking team who is touching the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line; or
(3) touches a player of the kicking team who has touched the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line and has not reestablished
himself in the field of play (see 11-4-2-b for exception for a missed field goal from beyond the 20-yard line).
(d) if any legal or illegal kick touches the receivers’ goal posts, crossbar, or uprights, other than one which scores a field goal;
(e) if the kickers interfere with the opportunity to catch an airborne kick or with a fair catch behind the receivers’ goal line (10-1
and 10-2); or
(f) if a player of the kicking team illegally catches or recovers a scrimmage kick in the field of play, and carries the ball across
the goal line, or touches the goal line with any part of his body while in possession of the ball. For exception for a missed field
goal from beyond the 20-yard line, see 11-4-2-b.
Note: If the impetus is a scrimmage kick, and there has been a spot of first touching by the kickers beyond the receivers’ 20-
yard line, the receivers shall have the option of taking possession of the ball at the spot of first touching.
ARTICLE 3. BALL NEXT IN PLAY. After a touchback, the team that has been awarded the touchback shall next snap the ball at
its 20-yard line from any point on or between the inbounds lines, or from its 35-yard line or 20-yard line (as applicable by Rule 6-
1-5) from any point on or between the inbounds lines if the touchback results from a free kick.