RULE 17 EMERGENCIES, UNFAIR ACTS
SECTION 1 EMERGENCIES
ARTICLE 1. NON-PLAYER ON FIELD. If any non-player, including photographers, reporters, employees, police or spectators,
enters the field of play or end zones, and in the judgment of an official said party or parties interfere with the play, the Referee,
after consulting the crew (13-1-7 and 19-1-3), shall enforce any such penalty or score as the interference warrants.
ARTICLE 2. FIELD CONTROL. If spectators enter the field and/or interfere with the progress of the game in such a manner
that in the opinion of the Referee the game cannot continue, the Referee shall declare timeout. In such a case, the Referee shall
record the number of the down, distance to be gained, and the position of the ball on the field. The Referee shall also secure
from the Line Judge the playing time remaining and record it. The Referee shall then order the home club through its
management to have the field cleared, and when it is cleared and order restored and the safety of the spectators, players and
officials is assured to the satisfaction of the Referee, the game must continue even if it is necessary to use lights.
ARTICLE 3. GAME CALLED. If the game must be called due to a state or municipal law, or by darkness if no lights are
available, an immediate report shall be made to the Commissioner by the home club, visiting club, and officials. On receipt of all
reports, the Commissioner shall make a decision which will be final.
ARTICLE 4. EMERGENCY SITUATIONS. The NFL affirms the position that in most circumstances all regular season and
postseason games should be played to their conclusion. If, in the opinion of appropriate League authorities, it is impossible to
begin or continue a game due to an emergency, or a game is deemed to be imminently threatened by any such emergency
(e.g., severely inclement weather, lightning, flooding, power failure), the following procedures (Articles 5 through 11) will serve
as guidelines for the Commissioner and/or the duly appointed representatives. The Commissioner has the authority to review
the circumstances of each emergency and to adjust the following procedures in whatever manner the Commissioner deems
appropriate. If, in the Commissioner’s opinion, it is reasonable to project that the resumption of an interrupted game would not
change its ultimate result or adversely affect any other inter-team competitive issue, the Commissioner is empowered to
terminate the game.
ARTICLE 5. LEAGUE AUTHORITY. The League employees vested with the authority to define emergencies under these
procedures are the Commissioner, designated representatives from the League office staff, and the game Referee. In those
instances where neither the Commissioner nor the designated representative is in attendance at a game, the Referee will have
sole authority; provided, however, that if the Referee delays the beginning of or interrupts a game for a significant period of time
due to an emergency, the Referee must make every effort to contact the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated
representative for consultation. In all cases of significant delay, the League authorities will consult with the management of the
participating clubs and will attempt to obtain appropriate information from outside sources, if applicable (e.g., weather bureau,
police).
ARTICLE 6. LATER DATE. If, because of an emergency, a regular season or postseason game is not started at its scheduled
time and cannot be played at any later time that same day, the game nevertheless must be played on a subsequent date to be
determined by the Commissioner.
ARTICLE 7. PRE-GAME THREAT. If there is deemed to be a threat of an emergency that may occur during the playing of a
game (e.g., an incoming tropical storm), the starting time of such game will not be moved to an earlier time unless there is
clearly sufficient time to make an orderly change.
ARTICLE 8. INTERRUPTED GAME. If, under emergency circumstances, an interrupted regular season or post season game
cannot be completed on the same day, such game will be rescheduled by the Commissioner and resumed at that point.
ARTICLE 9. ALTERNATE DATES, SITES. In instances under these emergency procedures which require the Commissioner to
reschedule a regular season game, the Commissioner will make every effort to set the game for no later than two days after its
originally scheduled date, and will attempt to schedule the game at its original site. If unable to do so, the Commissioner will
schedule it at the nearest available facility. If it is impossible to schedule the game within two days after its original date, the
Commissioner will be guided by the Emergencies and Unfair Acts provisions in the Policy Manual for Member Clubs: Game
Operations.
ARTICLE 10. POSTSEASON INTERRUPTION. If an emergency interrupts a postseason game and such game cannot be
resumed on that same date, the Commissioner will make every effort to arrange for its completion as soon as possible. If unable
to schedule the game at the same site, the Commissioner will select an appropriate alternate site. The Commissioner will
terminate the game short of completion only, if in the Commissioner’s judgment, the continuation of the game would not be
normally expected to alter the ultimate result.
ARTICLE 11. GAME RESUMPTION. In all instances where a game is resumed after interruption, either on the same date or a
subsequent date, the resumption will begin at the point at which the game was interrupted. At the time of interruption, the
Referee will call timeout and will make a record of the following: the team possessing the ball, direction in which its offense was
headed, position of the ball on the field, down, distance, period, time remaining in the period, and any other pertinent information
required for an efficient and equitable resumption of play.
SECTION 2 EXTRAORDINARILY UNFAIR ACTS
ARTICLE 1. COMMISSIONER AUTHORITY. The Commissioner has the sole authority to investigate and take appropriate
disciplinary and/or corrective measures if any club action, non-participant interference, or calamity occurs in an NFL game which
the Commissioner deems so extraordinarily unfair or outside the accepted tactics encountered in professional football that such
action has a major effect on the result of the game.
ARTICLE 2. NO CLUB PROTESTS. The authority and measures provided for in this entire Section 2 do not constitute a protest
mechanism for NFL clubs to avail themselves of in the event a dispute arises over the result of a game. The investigation called
for in this Section 2 will be conducted solely on the Commissioner’s initiative to review an act or occurrence that the
Commissioner deems so extraordinary or unfair that the result of the game in question would be inequitable to one of the
participating teams. The Commissioner will not apply authority in cases of complaints by clubs concerning judgmental errors or
routine errors of omission by game officials. Games involving such complaints will continue to stand as completed.
ARTICLE 3. PENALTIES FOR UNFAIR ACTS. The Commissioner’s powers under this Section 2 include the imposition of
monetary fines and draft-choice forfeitures, suspension of persons involved in unfair acts, and, if appropriate, the reversal of a
game’s result or the rescheduling of a game, either from the beginning or from the point at which the extraordinary act occurred.
In the event of rescheduling a game, the Commissioner will be guided by the procedures specified in Rule 17, Section 1, Articles
5 through 11, above. In all cases, the Commissioner will conduct a full investigation, including the opportunity for hearings, use
of game video, and any other procedure the Commissioner deems appropriate.