RULE 6 FREE KICKS
SECTION 1 PROCEDURES FOR A FREE KICK
ARTICLE 1. FREE KICK. A free kick is a kickoff, safety kick, or onside kick that puts the ball in play to start a free kick down. It
must be made from any point on the kicking team’s restraining line and between the inbounds lines.
(a) A kickoff puts the ball in play at the start of each half, after a Try, and after a successful field goal. A drop kick or place kick
may be used for a kickoff.
(b) A safety kick puts the ball in play after a safety. A drop kick, place kick, or punt may be used for a safety kick. A tee may be
used for a safety kick.
(c) An onside kick puts the ball in play by the team who is trailing in the game and declares that form of a free kick to the officials.
A holder can be used for an onside kick. See 6-1-6 and 6-2-2 below.
Note: During a free kick, the kicking team may use a manufactured tee designed to hold the ball no more than one inch from
the ground and approved by the League. Nothing, including a holder or designated holder, can be used to elevate the ball
more than one inch above the ground. Once the ball has been placed on the kicking tee, the kicking tee cannot be moved. If
the ball falls off the tee, the covering officials must stop play and restart the timing process without penalty to the kicking team.
If the ball falls off the tee a second time during the same free kick down, the kicking team then must kick it off the tee with the
use of a designated holder during a kickoff or safety kick, or with a holder during an onside kick. The designated holder during
a kickoff or safety kick shall be a uniformed member of the kicking team and may be the 12th person on the field, but he is a
non-player, must leave the field on his team’s sideline with the kicking tee immediately after the ball is kicked (5-2-8-h), and
is also subject to the rules of non-player conduct in accordance with Rule 13. Only on a declared onside kick, the ball may be
placed on the ground leaning against the tee, provided the tee is in its normal upright position.
Penalty: For illegal free kick: Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 2. RESTRAINING LINES AND ZONES. The restraining lines and applicable zones for a kickoff or safety kick shall be
as follows:
(a) “Kicker’s Restraining Line” - the restraining line for the kick by the kicking team shall be its 35-yard line for a kickoff and its
20-yard line for a safety kick unless it is adjusted because of a distance penalty.
(b) “Kicking Team’s Restraining Line” - the restraining line for the remaining 10 players of the kicking team shall be the receiving
team’s 40-yard line.
(c) “Receiving Team’s Restraining Line” - the restraining line for the receiving team shall be the receiving team’s 35-yard line.
(d) The “setup zone” for the receiving team is the 5-yard area between the receiving team’s 35-yard line and its 30-yard line. See
Article 6 below for the setup zone for an onside kick.
(e) The “landing zone” shall be the area from the receiving team’s 20-yard line extending to its goal line.
ARTICLE 3. KICKOFF OR SAFETY KICK FORMATION. From the time the kicker begins his approach to the ball and until the
ball touches the ground or a player in the landing zone or the end zone:
(a) All kicking team players must be inbounds and:
(1) all kicking team players other than the kicker must be lined up with their front foot on the kicking team’s restraining line,
and both feet must remain on the ground;
(2) at least two players must be lined up inbounds between the sideline and the bottom (outside) of the yard-line number,
at least two players must be lined up between the top (inside) of the yard-line number and the inbounds lines, and at
least two players must be lined up inside the inbounds lines.
(3) the kicker may be beyond the kicker’s restraining line, provided his kicking foot is not beyond the line.
(4) after the kick, the kicker may not cross the vicinity of the 50-yard line until the ball touches the ground or player in the
landing zone or the end zone.
(b) All receiving team players must be inbounds and on or behind their restraining line, and at least nine players must be
positioned in the setup zone. The following applies to the receiving team players in the setup zone:
(1) Players on Restraining Line. At least six of the players must be lined up with their front foot on the receiving team’s
restraining line. If the receiving team elects to have more than nine players in the setup zone, then at least seven
players must be lined up with their front foot on the receiving team’s restraining line.
a. At least one of the players must be lined up between the inbounds lines.
b. At least one of the players must be lined up between the top (inside) of the yard-line number and the inbounds
line on each side of the field.
c. At least one of the players must be lined up between the sideline and the bottom (outside) of the yard-line
number on each side of the field.
(2) Remaining Players in the Setup Zone (Not on Restraining Line). The receiving team may have a maximum of three
players in the setup zone not on the restraining line, but never more than one player in each of the three areas within
the setup zone bordered by the sidelines and inbounds lines.
(3) At least three players must be lined up outside the inbounds line on each side of the field.
(4) All receiving team players lined up outside the setup zone must remain behind the receiving team’s 20-yard line until
the ball is kicked and behind the receiving team’s 30-yard line until the ball lands or is touched by a receiving team
player in the landing zone or end zone.
(c) All players of the kicking team other than the kicker, and all receiving team players in the setup zone, must have both feet
remain on the ground.
(d) Once the kicking team is lined up in a stationary position, the receiving team shall be permitted a reasonable amount of time
to line up in the setup zone.
Penalty: For a player being beyond the restraining line when the ball is kicked (offside), a player being out of bounds
when the ball is kicked, either team being in an illegal formation when the ball is kicked, kicking team players (other than
the kicker) or receiving team players in the setup zone moving before permitted, or kicker moving beyond 15 yards from
the kicker’s restraining line before permitted (illegal formation): Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 4. CATCH OR RECOVERY OF A KICKOFF OR SAFETY KICK. The following applies to the catch or recovery of a
kickoff or safety kick:
(a) If a player of the receiving team catches or recovers the ball in the landing zone or inbounds in the end zone, he may advance.
(b) If the ball is declared dead while in the simultaneous possession of two opposing players, the ball is awarded to the receiving
team.
(c) A player of the kicking team may touch, catch, or recover the ball if it lands or is touched by a receiving team player in the
landing zone or in the end zone.
(d) The ball is dead if:
(1) it is caught or recovered by a player of the kicking team. If the catch or recovery is legal, the ball belongs to the kicking
team at the dead ball spot.
(2) it is downed by the receiving team in the end zone or goes out of bounds in the end zone (touchback).
(3) it first touches the ground or a player in advance of the front yard line of the landing zone.
(e) If the live ball comes to rest anywhere in the landing zone or in the end zone, and no player attempts to possess it, the ball
becomes dead and belongs to the receiving team at the dead ball spot.
ARTICLE 5. KICKOFF OR SAFETY KICK CROSSES GOAL LINE. A kickoff or safety kick into the end zone that remains
inbounds is a live ball and must be returned or downed by the receiving team. It is a touchback and the dead ball spot is the 20-
yard line if a kickoff or a safety kick:
(a) touches the ground or a player in the landing zone and is downed in the end zone by the receiving team or goes out of bounds
behind the receiving team’s goal line;
The dead ball spot is the 35-yard line if, without first touching the ground or a player in the landing zone, a kickoff or safety kick:
(b) goes out of bounds behind the receiving team’s goal line;
(c) strikes the receiving team’s goal post, uprights, or cross bar; or
(d) lands at or beyond the goal line and is downed in the end zone by the receiving team.
ARTICLE 6. ONSIDE KICK. At any time during the game, the kicking team, if trailing its opponent, may declare an onside kick
by notifying the Referee prior to the start of the play clock (25-second play clock after the Back Judge hands the kicker the ball).
The Referee will then notify the receiving team before starting the play clock and the following rules will apply:
(a) An onside kick is defined as a free kick that the kicking team attempts to legally recover from the kicking team’s restraining
line to the furthest point downfield within the onside kick setup zone (See definition of onside kick setup zone in (h) below).
(b) The restraining line for the kicking team on an onside kick is the kicking team’s 35-yard line or the kicking team’s 20-yard line
for a safety kick unless either line is adjusted because of a distance penalty.
(c) The following applies to kicking team players other than the kicker from the time the kicker begins his approach to the ball and
until the ball is kicked:
(1) All kicking team players other than the kicker must be lined up with their front foot on the kicking team’s restraining
line, and both feet must remain on the ground until the ball is kicked; and
(2) No more than five players of the kicking team may be on either side of the ball with the holder counting as one of the
five on either side; and
(3) On each side of the ball, at least two players (other than a holder) must be lined up inbounds between the sideline
and the bottom (outside) of the yard-line number, and at least two players (other than a holder) must be lined up
between the top (inside) of the yard-line number and the inbounds lines.
(d) All kicking team players must be inbounds and behind the ball when it is kicked, except:
(1) The holder of a place kick may be beyond the line, and
(2) The kicker may be beyond the line, provided that his kicking foot is not beyond the line.
(e) A player of the kicking team may legally touch, catch, or recover the ball if:
(1) It first touches a receiving team player; or
(2) It reaches or crosses the receiving team’s restraining line.
(f) The ball is dead if it is caught or recovered by a player of the kicking team. If the catch or recovery is legal, the ball belongs
to the kicking team at the dead ball spot.
(g) The restraining line for the receiving team shall be the yard line 10 yards in advance of the kicking team’s restraining line.
(h) Until the ball is kicked, all receiving team players must be inbounds and behind their restraining line, and at least eight, but
no more than nine, players must be positioned between their restraining line and a spot 15 yards behind their restraining line
(the “onside kick setup zone”).
(i) If a player of the receiving team catches or recovers the ball, he may advance.
(j) If the ball comes to rest anywhere on the field, and no player attempts to possess it, the ball becomes dead and belongs to
the receiving team at the dead ball spot.
(k) If the onside kick goes untouched beyond the onside kick setup zone, the ball becomes dead and belongs to the receiving
team.
Notes:
(1) A player is deemed to have not touched the ball if it is batted or illegally kicked into him by an opponent. Such touching
is ignored, though the bat or kick could be a foul for an illegal bat or illegal kick.
(2) For illegal catch or recovery, see 6-2-5.
Penalty: For a player being beyond the restraining line when the ball is kicked (offside), a player being out of bounds
when the ball is kicked, or either team being in an illegal formation when the ball is kicked: Loss of 5 yards.
Penalty: For an onside kick that goes untouched beyond the onside kick setup zone: Loss of 15 yards from the kicking
team’s restraining line and the receiving team takes possession.
ARTICLE 7. END OF FREE KICK. A free kick ends when either team possesses the ball, or when the ball is dead, if that precedes
possession. A running play begins when the receiving team establishes possession of the ball.
SECTION 2 OTHER FREE KICK FOULS
ARTICLE 1. BLOCKING DURING A KICKOFF OR SAFETY KICK.
Item 1. Kicking Team. After the ball hits or is touched in the landing zone or end zone, a kicking team player may legally block
an opponent, and he may use his hands and arms to push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to recover the
ball or push or pull aside a receiver who is actively attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield. During the kick, the
kicking team is subject to the blocking restrictions of the defense.
Item 2. Receiving Team.
(a) Until the ball hits or is touched in the landing zone or end zone, no player of the receiving team may initiate a block against
the kicking team.
(b) During the kick, receiving team players are subject to the blocking restrictions of the offense (see 12-1-1 through 12-1-3), and
they may use their hands/arms legally to push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to recover the ball.
Penalty: For illegal blocking or use of hands by either team: Loss of 10 yards.
(c) A “double team block” is permissible only by players who were initially lined up in the setup zone at the time of the kick. A
double team block is defined as two or more players who contact an opponent at the same time. Any other players may not
participate in a double team block at any time during a kick or during a return.
(d) A “wedge block” is not permitted by any players at any time. A wedge block is defined as two or more players intentionally
aligning shoulder-to-shoulder within two yards of each other, and who move forward together. The foul for a wedge block
occurs at that point; actual contact with an opponent is not necessary.
Penalty: For an illegal wedge block or an illegal double team block: Loss of 15 yards. If the foul occurs during the kick,
enforcement is from the spot of the foul. If the foul occurs during the return, the penalty is enforced as customary. If the
foul occurs in the receiving team’s end zone during the kick, it is enforced from the previous spot.
ARTICLE 2. BLOCKING DURING ONSIDE KICK.
Item 1. Kicking Team.
(a) Between the Restraining Lines (10 Yards). Until the ball is legally touched, a kicking team player may not block or use his
hands or arms against an opponent between the restraining lines, except to push or pull aside a receiver who is actively
attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield. After the ball is legally touched, a kicking team player may legally
block an opponent, and he may use his hands and arms to push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to
recover the ball or a receiver who is actively attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield.
(b) At or Five Yards Beyond Receiving Team’s Restraining Line (Next Five Yards). Until the ball is legally touched or touches
the ground, a kicking team player may not block or use his hands or arms against an opponent in the area that is at or no
more than five yards beyond the receiving team’s restraining line, except to push or pull aside a receiver who is actively
attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield. After the ball is legally touched or touches the ground, a kicking team
player may legally block an opponent anywhere, and he may use his hands and arms to push or pull an opponent out of the
way in a personal attempt to recover the ball.
(c) More than 15 Yards Beyond Kicking Team’s Restraining Line. The kicking team may legally block more than 15 yards
beyond its restraining line.
Item 2. Receiving Team.
(a) First 15 Yards. Until the ball is legally touched or the ball hits the ground no player on the receiving team may initiate a block
against the kicking team in the 15-yard area between the kicking team’s restraining line and five yards behind the receiving
team’s restraining line.
(b) More than 15 Yards Beyond Kicking Team’s Restraining Line. The receiving team may legally block more than 15 yards
beyond the kicking team’s restraining line.
(c) After the ball is kicked, receiving team players are subject to the blocking restrictions of the offense (see 12-1-1 through 12-
1-3), and they may use their hands/arms legally to push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to recover
the ball.
(d) Double Team and Wedge Blocks. Restrictions in Article 1, Item 2(c) and (d) above and penalty enforcement for those blocks
also apply to onside kicks.
Penalty: For illegal blocking on an onside kick or use of hands by either team: Loss of 10 yards.
ARTICLE 3. RUNNING INTO FREE KICKER. A player of the receiving team is not permitted to run into the kicker before he
recovers his balance. See also 12-2-8-i for personal fouls against the kicker.
Penalty: For running into the kicker: Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 4. FREE KICK OUT OF BOUNDS OR NOT REACHING THE LANDING ZONE. The kicking team may not (a) kick the
ball out of bounds, (b) be the last to touch the ball before it goes out of bounds between the goal lines, or (c) kick the ball which
first touches the ground or a player in advance of the front yard line of the landing zone. If the receiving team is the last to touch
the ball before it goes out of bounds, the receiving team puts the ball in play at the inbounds spot.
Penalty: For a kickoff or onside kick out of bounds or a kickoff that lands or is touched in advance of the front yard line
of the landing zone: The receiving team may elect to take possession of the ball 25 yards from the spot of the kick at the
inbounds line on the side of the field where the ball went out of bounds or lands or is touched short of the landing zone,
at the out of bounds spot, or at the spot where the ball lands or is touched in advance of the front yard line of the landing
zone if less than 25 yards.
Penalty: For a safety kick out of bounds or a safety kick that lands or is touched in advance of the front yard line of the
landing zone: The receiving team may elect to take possession of the ball 30 yards from the spot of the kick at the
inbounds line on the side of the field where the ball went out of bounds or lands or is touched short of the landing zone,
at the out of bounds spot, or at the spot where the ball lands or is touched in advance of the front yard line of the landing
zone if less than 30 yards.
ARTICLE 5. FREE KICK ILLEGALLY TOUCHED.
Item 1. Ball Reaches Restraining Line During Onside Kick. A player of the kicking team may not touch, catch, or recover the
ball before it has reached the receiving team’s restraining line, unless it has first been touched by a receiving team player.
Penalty: For illegal touching of an onside kick by the kicking team: Loss of five yards, or the receiving team takes
possession of the ball at the spot of the illegal touch.
Item 2. Player Out of Bounds. If a kicking team player goes out of bounds during the kick, either of his own volition or by being
legally forced out of bounds, he may not touch or recover the ball beyond the receiving team’s restraining line on an onside kick
or in the landing zone or end zone on all other free kicks, unless it has first been touched by a receiving team player. If a kicking
team player touches the ball before reestablishing himself legally inbounds, it is a free kick out of bounds.
Penalty: For illegal touching of a free kick by the kicking team: Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 6. PLAYER VOLUNTARILY OUT OF BOUNDS ON A FREE KICK. Prior to the ball being touched by the receiving
team or the end of the kick, it is a foul if a kicking team player voluntarily goes out of bounds (without being contacted by a
receiving team player) to avoid a block.
Penalty: For voluntarily going out of bounds on a free kick without contact: Loss of five yards.
SECTION 3 ENFORCEMENT OF FOULS
ARTICLE 1. ENFORCEMENT FROM PREVIOUS SPOT. If there is a foul during a free kick, enforcement is from the previous
spot, and the free kick is made again. However, if the kicking team commits a foul prior to the end of the kick, or the receiving
team commits a foul at or during a kickoff or safety kick, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, the
offended team will have the option of enforcing the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down or enforcing the penalty
yardage from the dead ball spot. The dead ball spot for free kicks that result in a touchback is the 20-yard line or 35-yard line
(See Section 1, Article 5 above).
Exceptions:
(a) A personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot if it occurs in
Team B’s end zone;
(b) A foul for fair catch interference is enforced from the spot of the foul;
(c) A foul for interference with the opportunity to make a catch is enforced from the spot of the foul;
(d) A foul for an invalid fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot if it occurs in Team B’s end
zone;
(e) A foul for an illegal double team block, or an illegal wedge block, during the kick is enforced from the spot of the foul or
the previous spot if it occurs in Team B’s end zone;
(f) For a free kick out of bounds or not reaching the landing zone, see Section 2, Article 4; or
(g) For a free kick illegally touched, see Section 2, Article 5.
Note: In (a), (b) (c), and (e) above, if the foul is not part of a double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the
down, the foul may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See 14-2-4.