RULE 16 OVERTIME PROCEDURES
SECTION 1 OVERTIME PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 1. SCORE TIED. If the score is tied at the end of the regulation playing time of all regular season and postseason
NFL games, a system of modified sudden-death overtime shall be in effect, pursuant to the following.
ARTICLE 2. END OF REGULATION. At the end of regulation playing time, the Referee shall immediately toss a coin at the
center of the field, in accordance with rules pertaining to a usual pregame toss (4-2-2). The visiting team captain is to again call
the toss.
ARTICLE 3. OVERTIME IN REGULAR SEASON. Following an intermission of no more than three minutes after the end of a
regular season game, an extra period of 10 minutes shall commence. The following shall apply:
(a) Both teams must have the opportunity to possess the ball once during the extra period, unless the team kicking off to start
the overtime period scores a safety on the receiving team’s initial possession, in which case the team that kicked off is the
winner.
(b) After each team has had an opportunity to possess the ball, if one team has more points than its opponent, it is the winner,
subject to Article 5(a) below.
(c) If the team that possesses the ball first does not score on its initial possession, or if the score is tied after each team has
had its opportunity to possess the ball, the team next scoring by any method shall be the winner.
(d) There shall be a maximum of one 10-minute period, even if the second team has not had an opportunity to possess the ball
or if its initial possession has not ended. If the score is tied at the end of the period, the game shall result in a tie.
(e) Each team shall be entitled to two timeouts, and if there is an excess timeout, the usual rules shall apply (see 4-5). The
general provisions for the fourth quarter of a game, including timing, shall apply.
ARTICLE 4. OVERTIME IN POSTSEASON. Following an intermission of no more than three minutes after the end of the
regular game, an extra period of 15 minutes shall commence. The following shall apply:
(a) Both teams must have the opportunity to possess the ball at least once during the extra period, unless the team kicking off
to start the overtime period scores a safety on the receiving team’s initial possession, in which case the team that kicked off
is the winner.
(b) After each team has had an opportunity to possess the ball, if one team has more points than its opponent, it is the winner,
subject to Article 5(a) below.
(c) If the team that possesses the ball first does not score on its initial possession, or if the score is tied after each team has
had its opportunity to possess the ball, the team next scoring by any method shall be the winner.
(d) If the score is tied at the end of a 15-minute overtime period, or if the second team’s initial possession has not ended,
another overtime period will begin, and play will continue, regardless of how many 15-minute periods are necessary.
(e) Between each overtime period, there shall be a two-minute intermission, but there shall be no halftime intermission after the
second period. At the beginning of the third overtime period, the captain who lost the coin toss prior to the first overtime
period shall have the first choice of the two privileges in 4-2-2, unless the team that won the coin toss deferred.
(f) At the end of the first and third extra periods, etc., teams must change goals in accordance with 4-2-3.
(g) Each team is entitled to three timeouts during a half. If there is an excess timeout, the usual rules shall apply (see 4-5).
(h) At the end of a second overtime period, timing rules shall apply as at the end of the first half. At the end of a fourth overtime
period, timing rules shall apply as at the end of the fourth period.
(i) At the end of a fourth overtime period, there will be another coin toss pursuant to Section 1, Article 2, and play will continue
until a winner is declared.
ARTICLE 5. GENERAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OVERTIME. The following applies in both the regular season and
postseason.
(a) If the first team to possess the ball scores a field goal or touchdown, after which the second team loses possession by an
interception or fumble, the down will be permitted to run to its conclusion, and all rules of the game will be enforced as
customary, including awarding points scored by either team during the down. Only fouls that require the down to be
replayed, fouls that negate a score, or palpably unfair acts will be enforced.
Notes:
(1) In such situations, if the player who intercepts the pass or recovers the fumble goes to the ground and makes no effort
to advance, the covering official will blow his whistle to end the game.
(2) If the second team loses possession by an interception or fumble, but the opponent committed a foul prior to the
change of possession, the second team’s possession has not legally ended, and the game cannot end on the down.
However, in certain situations, the second team cannot decline the penalty and accept the result of the play, or accept
a penalty enforcement, if it would create a second possession for itself. In that situation, it can only accept an
enforcement that extends its initial possession.
(3) The situation in (2) may also affect the team that receives the opening kickoff during its first possession. If there is a
foul by the second team followed by a double change of possession, and the first team accepts the result of the play,
the second team has had its required possession, and the first team has possession of the ball for the second time.
However, if it accepts the penalty, it will extend its initial possession.
(b) A player is in possession when he has a firm grip and control of the ball inbounds (3-2-7). The defense gains possession
when it catches, intercepts, or recovers a loose ball.
(c) The opportunity to possess applies only during kicking plays. A kickoff is the opportunity to possess for the receiving team.
If the kicking team legally recovers the kick, the receiving team is considered to have had its opportunity. A punt or field goal
attempt that crosses the line of scrimmage and is muffed by the receiving team is considered to be an opportunity to
possess for the receiving team. Normal touching rules by the kicking team apply.
(d) All replay reviews will be initiated by the Replay Official. Coaches’ challenges will not be allowed.
(e) Disqualified player(s) shall not re-enter during any extra period or periods.
(f) Except as provided for above, all other general and specific rules shall apply.