RULE 4 GAME TIMING
SECTION 1 PERIODS, INTERMISSIONS, HALFTIME
ARTICLE 1. LENGTH OF GAME. The length of the game is 60 minutes, divided into four periods of 15 minutes each. In the
event the score is tied at the end of four periods, the game is extended by an overtime period (or periods) as prescribed in Rule
16.
ARTICLE 2. INTERMISSIONS. There will be intervals of at least two minutes between the first and second periods (first half)
and between the third and fourth periods (second half). During these intermissions all playing rules continue in force, and no
representative of either team shall enter the field unless he is an incoming substitute, or a team attendant or trainer entering to
see to the welfare of a player. The head coach may enter the field to check on the welfare of a player who is injured, but no
assistant coach may enter the field.
Penalty: For illegally entering the field: Loss of 15 yards from the succeeding spot (13-1-6-Pen.).
ARTICLE 3. HALFTIME. Between the second and third periods, there shall be an intermission of 13 minutes. During this
intermission, play is suspended, and teams may leave the field. The Back Judge will time halftime. See 13-1-1 for fouls by nonplayers
between halves.
ARTICLE 4. OFFICIAL TIME. The stadium electric clock shall be the official time. The game clock operator shall start and stop
the clock upon the signal of any official in accordance with the rules. The Side Judge shall supervise the timing of the game, and
in case the stadium clock becomes inoperative, or if it is not being operated correctly, the Side Judge shall take over official
timing on the field. Game officials can correct the game clock only before the next legal snap or kick, including an untimed down
or Try.
SECTION 2 STARTING A PERIOD OR HALF
ARTICLE 1. KICKOFF ON SCHEDULE. Both teams must be on the field to kick off at the scheduled time for the start of each
half. Prior to the start of the game, both teams are required to appear on the field at least 10 minutes prior to the scheduled
kickoff to ensure sufficient time for proper warm-up. Designated members of the officiating crew must notify designated
members of each team of the scheduled time for kickoff prior to the start of each half.
Penalties:
(a) For delaying the start of a half: Loss of 15 yards from the spot of the kickoff as determined by 6-1-2-a.
(b) For failure to appear on the field at least 10 minutes prior to the scheduled kickoff of the first half: Loss of the cointoss
option for both halves and overtime, and loss of 15 yards from the spot of the kickoff for the first half.
ARTICLE 2. TOSS OF COIN. Not more than three minutes before the kickoff of the first half, the Referee, in the presence of
both team’s captains (limit of six per team, active, inactive or honorary) shall toss a coin at the center of the field. Prior to the
Referee’s toss, the call of “heads” or “tails” must be made by the captain of the visiting team, or by the captain designated by the
Referee if there is no home team. Unless the winner of the toss defers his choice to the second half, he must choose one of two
privileges, and the loser is given the other. The two privileges are:
(a) The opportunity to receive the kickoff, or to kick off; or
(b) The choice of goal his team will defend.
If the coin does not turn over in the air or the toss is compromised in any way, the Referee shall toss it again. The captain’s
original call may not be changed.
Penalty: For failure to comply: Loss of coin-toss option for both halves and overtime, and loss of 15 yards from the
spot of the kickoff for the first half.
For the second half, the captain who lost the pregame toss is to have the first choice of the two privileges listed in (a) or (b),
unless one of the teams lost its first and second half options, or unless the winner of the pregame toss deferred his choice to the
second half, in which case he must choose (a) or (b) above. Immediately prior to the start of the second half, the captains of both
teams must inform the Referee of their respective choices.
A captain’s first choice from any alternative privileges listed above is final and not subject to change.
ARTICLE 3. CHANGE OF GOALS. At the end of the first and third periods, the teams must change goals. Team possession,
the number of the succeeding down, the relative position of the ball on the field of play, and the line to gain remain the same.
SECTION 3 STARTING THE GAME CLOCK
ARTICLE 1. FREE KICK DOWN. The game clock operator shall start the game clock (time in) after a free kick when the ball is
legally touched in the field of play. The game clock shall not start if:
(a) the receiving team touches or recovers the ball in the end zone and does not carry the ball into the field of play;
(b) the kicking team recovers the ball in the field of play (prior to any other legal touching); or
(c) the receiving team signals for and makes a fair catch.
ARTICLE 2. SCRIMMAGE DOWN. Following any timeout (3-36-1), the game clock shall be started on a scrimmage down
when the ball is next snapped, except in the following situations:
(a) Whenever a runner goes out of bounds on a play from scrimmage, the game clock is started on the Referee’s signal that a
ball has been returned to play, except that the clock will start on the snap:
(1) after a change of possession;
(2) after the two-minute warning of the first half; or
(3) inside the last five minutes of the second half.
(b) If there is an injury timeout prior to the two-minute warning, the game clock is started as if the injury timeout had not
occurred.
(c) If there is an excess team timeout after the two-minute warning, the game clock is started as if the excess timeout had not
occurred, unless the opponent chooses to have the clock start on the snap.
(d) If there is a Referee’s timeout, the game clock is started as if the Referee’s timeout had not occurred.
(e) If the game clock is stopped before or after a down for a foul by either team, following enforcement or declination of a
penalty, the game clock will start as if the foul had not occurred, except that the clock will start on the snap if:
(1) the foul occurs after the two-minute warning of the first half;
(2) the foul occurs inside the last five minutes of the second half;
(3) the offense commits a foul during the fourth period or regular season overtime after the ball has been made ready for
play, causing the clock to stop before a snap;
(4) the offense commits two successive delay of game penalties during the same down while time is in (see 12-3-1-n); or
(5) a specific rule prescribes otherwise.
(f) If a fumble or backward pass by any player goes out of bounds, the game clock starts on the Referee’s signal that a ball has
been returned to the field of play.
(g) When there is a 10-second runoff, the game clock starts when the Referee signals that the ball is ready for play.
(h) During the Try, which is an untimed down.
(i) When a specific rule prescribes otherwise.
ARTICLE 3. FAIR CATCH KICK DOWN. The game clock operator shall start the game clock for a fair catch kick down when
the ball is kicked.
SECTION 4 STOPPING THE GAME CLOCK
The game clock operator shall stop the game clock (timeout) upon a signal by any official or upon the operator’s own positive
knowledge:
(a) at the end of a down in which there is a free kick or fair catch kick;
(b) when the kicking team recovers a scrimmage kick beyond the line of scrimmage;
(c) when the ball is out of bounds;
(d) when the ball is dead on or behind a goal line;
(e) at the end of a down during which a foul occurs;
(f) when a forward pass is incomplete;
(g) at the time of a foul for which the ball remains dead or is dead immediately;
(h) when the Referee signals the two-minute warning for a half;
(i) when a down is completed during which or after there is a change of possession; or
(j) when any official signals a timeout for any other reason.
SECTION 5 TIMEOUTS
ARTICLE 1. CHARGED TEAM TIMEOUTS. The Referee shall suspend play while the ball is dead and declare a charged team
timeout upon the request for a timeout by the head coach or any player (not a substitute) to any official. If an assistant coach
signals for a timeout and it is inadvertently granted, the timeout will stand.
Item 1. Three Timeouts Allowed. A team is allowed three charged team timeouts during each half. The Referee or another
game official will notify the head coach when he has exhausted his three charged team timeouts in a half.
Item 2. Length of Timeouts. Charged team timeouts shall be two minutes in length unless the timeout is not used by television
for a commercial break. Timeouts shall be 30 seconds in length when the designated number of television commercials have
been exhausted in a quarter, if it is a second charged team timeout in the same dead ball period, or when the Referee so
indicates.
Item 3. Consecutive Team Timeouts. Each team may be granted a charged team timeout during the same dead ball period,
but a second charged team timeout by either team during the same dead ball period is prohibited. Such team timeouts may
follow a Referee’s timeout or any automatic timeouts.
Penalty: For when a team requests a second timeout during the same dead ball period, or a timeout after exhausting its
three timeouts during a half: Loss of five yards for delay of game and the timeout is charged.
If the timeout is by the offense while time is in after the two-minute warning, a 10-second runoff option is available. If
the timeout is by the defense while time is in, the play clock is reset to 40 seconds. If time is in, the game clock will
start with the ready for play signal unless the offense chooses to have the clock start on the snap.
Item 4. Unsportsmanlike Conduct. An attempt to call an excess team timeout, or to call a second timeout in the same dead
ball period, by Team B in an attempt to “freeze” a kicker, shall be ignored and is unsportsmanlike conduct even if inadvertently
granted (See 12-3-1-v). The timeout will be charged if inadvertently granted. This will apply to field goal or Try attempts.
ARTICLE 2. INJURY TIMEOUTS. If an official determines a player to be injured, or if attendants from the bench come on the
field to assist an injured player, an injury timeout will be called by the Referee. If the AT Spotter identifies a player for medical
attention, the rules pertaining to Injury Timeouts in Article 3 and Article 4 (c) apply.
ARTICLE 3. INJURY TIMEOUTS PRIOR TO TWO-MINUTE WARNING OF EITHER HALF. When an injury timeout is called,
the injured player must leave the game for the completion of one down. The player will be permitted to remain in the game if:
(a) either team calls a charged team timeout;
(b) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or
(c) the period ends or the two-minute warning occurs before the next snap.
At the conclusion of an injury timeout, the game clock will start as if the injury timeout had not occurred. If either team takes or is
charged with a timeout, the clock will start on the snap.
ARTICLE 4. INJURY TIMEOUTS AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING OF EITHER HALF. After the two-minute warning of a half,
the following shall apply:
(a) If a team has not used its three charged team timeouts, the team of the injured player will be charged a team timeout,
unless:
(1) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or
(2) the injury occurs during a down in which there is a change of possession, a touchdown, a safety, a successful field
goal, or an attempted Try.
(b) If a team has used its three charged team timeouts, an excess team timeout shall be called by the Referee, unless:
(1) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or
(2) the injury occurs during a down in which there is a change of possession, a touchdown, a safety, a successful field
goal, or an attempted Try.
(c) The player must leave the game for the completion of one down, unless:
(1) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or
(2) either team calls or is charged a team timeout other than an excess timeout.
Penalty: For the second and each subsequent excess team timeout after the two-minute warning: Loss of five yards
from the succeeding spot for delay of the game.
Notes:
(1) No yardage penalty will be assessed for the first excess team timeout, but a 10-second runoff of the game clock may
be applicable pursuant to Note 3 below. At the conclusion of an excess timeout taken while time is in, the game clock
shall start with the ready for play signal, unless the opponent chooses to have the clock start on the snap. For any
excess timeout charged to the defense, the play clock is reset to 40 seconds.
(2) If the Referee has already called an excess team timeout in that half for a team, any subsequent excess timeout for that
team will result in a five-yard penalty, and a 10-second runoff of the game clock may be applicable pursuant to Note 3
below. (A penalty for a fifth and subsequent excess timeout for injury shall be considered a foul between downs and will
not offset a foul or be part of a multiple foul. See 14-1-2-Item 4-Exc.).
(3) If an excess team timeout is charged against a team in possession of the ball, and the timeout causes the clock to stop
or delays the clock from starting on the ready for play signal, the ball shall not be put in play until the time on the game
clock has been reduced by 10 seconds, if the defense so chooses, the play clock reset to 30 seconds, and the game
clock shall start with the ready for play.
(4) Either half can end as the result of the 10-second runoff referenced above.
(5) If an injury timeout is called for both teams during or after a down, charged team timeouts and/or excess team timeouts
are charged as appropriate, but no yardage or 10-second runoff penalties shall be enforced.
(6) If a foul by either team occurs during a down in which there is also an injury, such foul does not affect the charging of
an excess timeout, but it does prevent a 10-second runoff that may result from the excess timeout, because the foul
stopped the clock.
(7) If a dead ball foul by either team occurs after a play in which there is also an injury to the opposing team, such foul
does not affect the charging of an excess timeout, but it does prevent a 10-second runoff or 40-second play clock reset
that may result from the excess timeout.
(8) The Competition Committee deprecates feigning injuries, with subsequent withdrawal, to obtain a timeout without
penalty. Coaches are urged to cooperate in discouraging this practice.
(9) There can never be a 10-second runoff against the defensive team.
ARTICLE 5. REFEREE’S TIMEOUT. Provided that calling timeout is not in conflict with another rule, the Referee may suspend
play and stop the clock (Referee’s timeout) at any time without penalty to either team when playing time is being consumed
because of an unintentional delay. Such situations include, but are not limited to:
(a) when there is the possibility of a measurement for a first down, or if the Referee is consulting with a captain about one;
(b) when there is an undue pileup on the runner, or while determining possession after a fumble while time is in;
(c) when there is an undue delay by officials in spotting the ball for the next snap;
(d) if the snap is made before the officials can assume their positions (See 4-6-5-b if it is a repeated act);
(e) when there is an injury to an official or member of the chain crew;
(f) during an officials’ conference; or
(g) while repairing or replacing game equipment, except player equipment.
After a Referee’s timeout, the time remaining on the play clock shall be the same as when it was stopped. The play clock and
the game clock will start as if the Referee’s timeout had not occurred.
SECTION 6 DELAY OF GAME
ARTICLE 1. 40-SECOND PLAY CLOCK. It is a delay of the game if the ball is not put in play by a snap within 40 seconds after
the start of the play clock. The play clock operator shall time the interval between plays upon signals from game officials. The
40-second interval starts when a play ends, unless Article 2 below applies.
ARTICLE 2. 25-SECOND PLAY CLOCK. In the event of certain administrative stoppages or other delays, a team will have 25
seconds, beginning with the Referee’s whistle, to put the ball in play next by a snap or a kick. Such stoppages include, but are
not limited to:
(a) a change of possession;
(b) a charged team timeout;
(c) the two-minute warning;
(d) the expiration of a period;
(e) a penalty enforcement;
(f) a free kick after a television timeout;
(g) a free kick without a television timeout. Following a Try or successful field goal attempt, teams will have 40 seconds to align
prior to the Referee’s whistle; or
(h) replay administration pursuant to Rule 15, Section 9, if the play clock is under 25 seconds.
A 25-second interval will be used in these situations, even if the 40-second clock is already counting down.
ARTICLE 3. INTERRUPTION OF PLAY CLOCK. If the play clock is stopped prior to the snap for any reason, after the
stoppage has concluded, the time remaining on the play clock shall be the same as when it stopped, unless:
(a) the stoppage has been for a charged team timeout, the two-minute warning, the expiration of a period, replay administration
pursuant to Rule 15-9 with fewer than 25 seconds on the play clock, or a penalty enforcement, in which case the play clock
shall be reset to 25 seconds;
(b) the stoppage has been for an Instant Replay review that results in a reversal that does not result in a 10-second runoff or a
team timeout, a live ball foul that is subsequently nullified after crew conference, an excess timeout while time is in that is
charged to the defense, or the enforcement of a defensive foul that conserves time, in which case the play clock shall be
reset to 40 seconds, unless another rule requires otherwise;
(c) the stoppage results in a 10-second runoff from the game clock, in which case the play clock shall be reset to 30 seconds;
or
(d) fewer than 10 seconds remain on the play clock, in which case it shall be reset to 10 seconds, or the exact time on the play
clock at the discretion of the Referee.
ARTICLE 4. BALL REMAINS DEAD. If the ball is not put in play within the applicable period, the Back Judge shall blow his
whistle for the foul, and the ball remains dead. See 14-4-1-Item 1.
ARTICLE 5. OTHER DELAY OF GAME FOULS. Other examples of action or inaction that are to be construed as delay of the
game include, but are not limited to:
(a) a player unnecessarily remains on a dead ball or on a runner who has been downed;
(b) the snapper repeatedly snaps the ball after the neutral zone is established and before all the officials have had a reasonable
time to assume their positions (see 7-6-3-c);
(c) undue delay by either team in assembling after a timeout;
(d) a defensive player aligned in a stationary position within one yard of the line of scrimmage makes quick and abrupt actions
that are not a part of normal defensive player movement and are an obvious attempt to cause an offensive player(s) to foul
(false start). The officials shall blow their whistles immediately. If the defender is walking or running toward the line of
scrimmage in an effort to time the snap, but stops abruptly because the snap is not made, it is not a foul for delay of game;
(e) spiking or throwing the ball in the field of play after a down has ended, except after a score;
(f) intentional contact with the football to delay the snap or the officials’ ability to make the ball ready for play; or
(g) when a team requests a second timeout during the same dead ball period or a timeout after exhausting its three timeouts
during a half. See 4-5-1 for enforcement.
Penalty: For delay of the game: Loss of five yards:
(a) from the succeeding spot if it occurs between downs and the ball remains dead; or
(b) from the previous spot if the ball was in play.
SECTION 7 ACTIONS THAT CONSERVE TIME
ARTICLE 1. ILLEGAL ACTS. A team is not permitted to conserve time after the two-minute warning of either half by committing
any of these acts:
(a) a foul by either team that stops the clock during any dead ball period;
(b) intentional grounding;
(c) an illegal forward pass;
(d) throwing a backward pass out of bounds;
(e) spiking or throwing the ball in the field of play after a down has ended, except after a touchdown; or
(f) illegally batting or kicking the ball out of bounds.
Penalty: For illegally conserving time: Loss of five yards unless a larger distance penalty is applicable.
Item 1. Actions by the Offense. When actions referred to above are committed by the offensive team while time is in, officials
will run off 10 seconds from the game clock and reset the play clock to 30 seconds before permitting the ball to be put in play on
the ready for play signal. The game clock will start on the ready for play signal unless another rule prescribes otherwise. If the
offensive team has timeouts remaining, it will have the option of using a timeout in lieu of a 10-second runoff, in which case the
game clock will start on the snap after the timeout. The defense always has the option to decline the 10-second runoff and have
the yardage penalty enforced, but if the yardage penalty is declined, the 10-second runoff is also declined, the play clock is set
to 25 seconds, and the clock starts on the snap.
Item 2. Actions by the Defense. If the action is by the defense, the play clock will be reset to 40 seconds, and the game clock
will start on the ready signal, unless the offense chooses to have the clock start on the snap. If the defense has timeouts
remaining, it will have the option of using a timeout in lieu of the game clock being started.
ARTICLE 2. SUBSTITUTION VIOLATION AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING. After the two-minute warning of either half, if
there is a violation of the substitution rule while the ball is dead and time is in, in addition to the applicable yardage penalty for
illegal substitution, there will be a 10-second runoff pursuant to Article 1, Item 1 above.
Penalty: For illegal substitution: Loss of five yards (unless a larger distance penalty is applicable) and a 10-second
runoff.
ARTICLE 3. DEFENSIVE FOULS OR INJURIES DURING LAST 40 SECONDS. In the last 40 seconds of either half, if there is
a defensive foul that conserves time or an excess timeout due to injury to a defensive player while time is in, the half will end,
unless the defense has timeouts remaining, or the offense chooses to have the game clock start on the snap or continue play
after the clock starts on the ready for play.
ARTICLE 4. 10-SECOND RUNOFF AFTER REPLAY REVIEW OR NULLIFIED FOUL AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING OF
EITHER HALF. If a replay review after the two-minute warning of either half results in the on-field ruling being reversed or if a
foul is called on either team while time is in and is subsequently nullified, and the correct ruling would not have stopped the
game clock, or would have otherwise restarted the game clock before the next snap, the officials will run 10 seconds off the
game clock and reset the play clock to 30 seconds before permitting the ball to be put in play on the ready for play signal.
Neither team can decline the runoff, but either team can use a remaining timeout to prevent it.
SECTION 8 EXTENSION OF A PERIOD OR A HALF
ARTICLE 1. BALL IN PLAY. If time expires at the end of any period while the ball is in play, the period continues until the down
ends.
ARTICLE 2. PERIOD EXTENDED. A period may be extended for one untimed down, if any of the following occurs during a
down during which time in the period expires, or during which the period had been extended pursuant to this Article:
(a) If there is a live ball foul by the defensive team that is accepted, the offensive team may choose to extend the period by an
untimed down after enforcement of the penalty. If the first or third period is not so extended, any accepted penalty is
enforced before the start of the succeeding period.
(b) If there is a foul by the offense, there shall be no extension of the period. If the foul occurs on the last play of the half, a
score by the offense is not counted. However, the period may be extended for an untimed down, upon the request of the
defense, if the offensive team’s foul or violation is for:
(1) illegal touching or first touching of a kick;
(2) fair catch interference;
(3) a palpably unfair act;
(4) a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul committed during a down prior to a safety, an interception of a forward
pass, the recovery of a backward pass or fumble, or the offensive team failing to reach the line to gain on fourth down;
or
(5) a foul by the kicking team prior to a player of the receiving team securing possession of the ball during a down in which
there is a scrimmage kick, or a free kick.
(c) If a touchdown is made on the last play of a period, the Try attempt shall be made (except during sudden-death overtime, or
if a touchdown is scored during a down in which time in the fourth period expires and a successful Try would not affect the
outcome of the game).
(d) If no fair catch signal is given and the kickers interfere with the receiver’s opportunity to catch a kick, the receiving team may
extend the period by a down from scrimmage.
(e) If a fair catch is signaled and made, the receivers may choose to extend the period by a fair catch kick down (10-2-4). If the
first or third period is not so extended, the receivers may start the succeeding period by either a down from scrimmage or
fair catch kick (11-4-3).
(f) If a fair catch is signaled and the kickers interfere with a receiver’s opportunity to catch a kick, the receiving team may
extend the period by either a down from scrimmage or a fair catch kick (10-2-4).
(g) If a safety results from a foul during the last play of a half, the score counts. A safety kick is made if requested by the
receivers.
(h) If a double foul occurs during the last down of either half, the period shall be extended by an untimed down.
Exceptions: The half is not extended if:
(1) both fouls are dead ball fouls;
(2) there is a major-minor double foul (“5 versus 15”), and the major foul is by the offense, or if the major foul is a dead ball
foul by either team;
(3) The only foul by the defense is a dead ball foul (“clean hands end of half,” see 14-4-9-Exc. 3); or
(4) there is a double foul with a change of possession (clean hands” rule 14-5-2) that does not involve a replay of the
down.
If a double foul occurs on the last play of the first or third periods, the period is not extended.
If the first or third period is extended for any reason, or if a touchdown occurs during the last play of such a period, any additional
play, including a Try attempt, shall be completed before the teams change goals.
There may be more than one untimed down at the end of a period pursuant to this Article.