RULE 19 OFFICIALS
SECTION 1 OFFICIALS
ARTICLE 1. GAME OFFICIALS. The game shall be played under the supervision of seven officials: the Referee, Umpire, Down
Judge, Line Judge, Field Judge, Side Judge, and Back Judge. In the absence of seven officials, the crew is to be rearranged
according to the remaining members of the crew.
ARTICLE 2. JURISDICTION. The officials’ jurisdiction begins 100 minutes before the scheduled kickoff and ends when the
Referee declares the final score.
ARTICLE 3. REFEREE’S AUTHORITY. The Referee is to have general oversight and control of the game. The Referee is the
final authority for the score. If there is a disagreement between members of the crew regarding the number of down, any
decision, or the application, enforcement, or interpretation of a rule, the Referee’s decision will be final. The Referee’s decisions
upon all matters not specifically placed under the jurisdiction of other officials by rule are final.
ARTICLE 4. RESPONSIBILITIES AND MECHANICS. Officiating responsibilities and mechanics are specified in the Mechanics
Manual, published annually by the National Football League.
SECTION 2 SUPPORT FROM NFL OFFICIATING STAFF
The Replay Official and designated members of the Officiating department at the League office may consult with the on-field
officials to provide objective information regarding on-field rulings and the correct application of playing rules. In addition, if the
designated members of the Officiating department determine that a foul for a football or non-football act called on the field is
flagrant, then they can instruct the on-field officiating crew to disqualify the player(s) who committed the foul. Those players who
were not penalized, but who engaged in football or non-football acts that were determined to be flagrant and directly related to
the foul called on the field, may also be disqualified by designated members of the Officiating department. A penalty will be
assessed when a player was not penalized by on-field officials but was subsequently disqualified pursuant to this Section. The
determination that a foul is flagrant must be based on the available video, and the designated members of the Officiating
department must instruct the officiating crew to disqualify the identified player(s) before the ball is next legally put in play.