RULE 9 SCRIMMAGE KICK
SECTION 1 KICK FROM SCRIMMAGE
ARTICLE 1. KICK ON OR BEHIND LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. Team A may attempt a punt, drop kick, or place kick from on or
behind the line of scrimmage. A kick is beyond the line of scrimmage if the kicker’s entire body and the ball are beyond the line of
scrimmage when the ball is kicked.
Penalty: For a punt, drop kick, or place kick that is kicked beyond the line of scrimmage or not from scrimmage: Loss of
down and five yards from the spot of the kick. For a second kick from behind the line after the ball has crossed the line:
Loss of down and five yards from the previous spot.
Notes:
(1) This is not considered illegally kicking the ball.
(2) A second kick from behind the line of scrimmage is legal provided the ball has not crossed the line and returned behind
the line.
(3) Scrimmage kick rules apply to punts, drop kicks, and place kicks anywhere on the field.
ARTICLE 2. KICKING TEAM PLAYERS ON LINE DURING KICK. During a kick from scrimmage, only the end men (eligible
receivers) on each side of the line of scrimmage at the time of the snap, or an eligible receiver who is aligned or in motion behind
the line and is more than one yard outside the end man on either side, are permitted to advance more than one yard beyond the
line before the ball is kicked.
Penalty: For ineligible player downfield before the ball is kicked: Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 3. DEFENSIVE TEAM FORMATION.
Item 1. Punt Formation. When Team A presents a punt formation:
(1) A Team B player, who is within one yard of the line of scrimmage, must have his entire body outside the snapper’s shoulder
pads at the snap.
Penalty: For illegal formation by the defense: Loss of five yards.
(2) Team B players cannot push teammates into the offensive formation.
Penalty: For pushing teammates into offensive formation: Loss of 15 yards.
Note: The restriction in (1) above does not apply if a team does not present a standard punt formation (an equal number of
players on either side of the snapper in a tight formation, and one player split out wide to either side), or if, after the offensive
team has assumed a set position, there is a shift, or a player goes in motion.
Item 2: Field Goal or Try Kick Formation. When Team A presents a field goal or Try Kick formation:
(1) A Team B player, who is within one yard of the line of scrimmage, must have his entire body outside the snapper’s shoulder
pads at the snap.
(2) No more than six Team B players may be on the line of scrimmage on either side of the snapper at the snap.
Penalty: For illegal formation by the defense: Loss of five yards.
(3) Team B players cannot push teammates into the offensive formation.
Penalty: For pushing teammates into offensive formation: Loss of 15 yards.
Note: The restrictions in (1) and (2) above do not apply if a team does not present a standard field goal or Try Kick formation
(an equal number of players on either side of the snapper in a tight formation), or if, after the offensive team has assumed a
set position, there is a shift, or a player goes in motion.
ARTICLE 4. BLOCKING DURING KICK. The following blocking rules apply during a scrimmage kick down:
(a) All players on the receiving team are prohibited from blocking below the waist during a down in which there is a scrimmage
kick.
(b) A player on the receiving team may not go out of bounds and block a member of the kicking team who is out of bounds (12-
2-8-c).
(c) Prior to the ball being kicked, the kicking team is subject to the blocking restrictions applicable to the offense, and the receiving
team is subject to the blocking restrictions applicable to the defense, except that a kicking team player may use his hands to
ward off, push, or pull aside a receiver who is legally or illegally attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield.
(d) After the ball is kicked and goes beyond the line of scrimmage, and until the kick ends (either team secures possession of the
ball, or the ball is dead by rule), the kicking team is subject to the blocking restrictions of the defense, and the receiving team
is subject to the blocking restrictions of the offense. (For the exception prohibiting a block in the back by the kicking team
while the ball is in flight, see 12-1-3-b.) After the kick ends, both teams are subject to the normal restrictions applicable to
offense and defense.
Exception: If the ball does not go beyond the line of scrimmage, or goes beyond the line of scrimmage and returns behind
the line untouched by the receiving team beyond the line, the blocking restrictions do not change, and the kicking team
continues to be subject to the blocking restrictions of the offense and the receiving team to the blocking restrictions of the
defense.
(e) During a scrimmage kick play that goes beyond the line of scrimmage, the penalty yardage for holding and illegal use of
hands fouls by either team shall be 10 yards unless the foul is committed in an attempt to block the kick (See 14-4-8).
ARTICLE 5. KICKING TEAM PLAYER VOLUNTARILY OUT OF BOUNDS. During a scrimmage kick that crosses the line of
scrimmage, and prior to the end of the kick, it is a foul if a kicking team player goes out of bounds voluntarily (without being
contacted by a receiving team player) to avoid a block by a receiving team player.
Penalty: For a kicking team player voluntarily going out of bounds on a scrimmage kick: Loss of five yards.
If a member of the kicking team is forced out of bounds, or goes out of bounds voluntarily, and does not attempt to return inbounds
in a reasonable amount of time, it is a foul for unsportsmanlike conduct (12-3-1-u).
SECTION 2 TOUCHING A SCRIMMAGE KICK
ARTICLE 1. TOUCHING BEHIND THE LINE. Any touching of the ball behind the line of scrimmage by a kicking team player is
legal, even if the ball has crossed the line and returns behind the line.
ARTICLE 2. FIRST TOUCHING BEYOND THE LINE. “First touching” is when a player of the kicking team touches a scrimmage
kick in the field of play that is beyond the line of scrimmage before it has been touched by a player of the receiving team beyond
the line. If the ball is first touched by a player of the kicking team, it remains in play. First touching is a violation, and the receivers
shall have the option of taking possession of the ball at the spot of first touching, provided no live ball penalty is accepted on the
play, or at the spot where the ball is dead. First touching does not offset a foul by the receivers; if there is a live ball foul by the
receivers that is enforced, either before or after the first touching violation, or any changes of possession, the violation is
disregarded, and the penalty is enforced as customary.
Notes:
(1) There may be multiple “first touch” spots if the kicking team touches the ball multiple times before it is touched by a player
of the receiving team.
(2) A Team B player is deemed not to have touched a kick if such touching occurs in the immediate vicinity of the line of
scrimmage in an attempt to block the kick.
(3) If a player of the kicking team touches the goal line with any part of his body while touching the ball, the ball is dead, and
the result of the play is a touchback.
(4) The spot of first touching is normally the yard line at which the ball is when touched. If the first touching occurs while the
ball is in the air above or beyond the goal line, and prior to the ball touching the goal line or the ground beyond the goal
line, the spot of first touching is deemed to be the spot from which the touching player left the field of play, but in no event
inside the receiving team’s one-yard line.
ARTICLE 3. KICKING TEAM PLAYER OUT OF BOUNDS. A player of the kicking team, who has gone out of bounds during the
kick, either of his own volition or by being legally forced out of bounds, may not touch or recover a scrimmage kick beyond the line
of scrimmage until it has been touched by a kicking team player who has not been out of bounds, or until it has been touched by
a player of the receiving team beyond the line. If he touches or recovers the ball before he has reestablished himself inbounds,
the ball is out of bounds at the spot of the touch, and there is no foul.
Penalty: For illegal touching of a scrimmage kick: Loss of five yards. If the illegal touching is inside the receiver’s fiveyard
line, in addition to the other specified options, the receiving team may elect to take a touchback.
ARTICLE 4. BLOCKED INTO KICK. There is no distinction between a player touching a ball or being touched by it, but a player
is not considered to have touched the ball if he is blocked into it by an opponent, provided he is in a passive position and not
blocking. A player who is engaged with and blocking his opponent when he contacts the ball is deemed to have touched the ball.
ARTICLE 5. BALL BATTED OR ILLEGALLY KICKED INTO OPPONENT. A receiving team player is deemed to have not
touched the ball if it is batted or illegally kicked into him by an opponent. Such touching by the receiving team is disregarded,
though the bat or kick could create a first touching violation or a foul for an illegal bat or illegal kick.
SECTION 3 CATCH OR RECOVERY OF A SCRIMMAGE KICK
ARTICLE 1. KICKERS CATCH OR RECOVER BEHIND LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. When a scrimmage kick is caught or recovered
by the kicking team behind the line of scrimmage, the kicking team may advance, even if the ball has crossed the line and returned
behind the line.
Item 1. Same Series of Downs. If the ball has returned behind the line untouched by the receiving team beyond the line, and the
kicking team catches or recovers the ball, the existing series of downs continues unless the kicking team advances the ball to the
line to gain, in which case there is a new series of downs.
Item 2. New Series of Downs. If the ball has returned behind the line after being touched by the receiving team beyond the line,
and the kicking team catches or recovers the ball, by rule there has been a change of possession, and the kicking team will be
awarded a new series of downs.
ARTICLE 2. KICKERS CATCH OR RECOVER BEYOND LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. When the kickers catch or recover a kick
beyond the line of scrimmage, the ball is dead at the spot of recovery, even if a member of the receiving team has first touched
the ball.
Item 1. Legal Catch or Recovery. If the receiving team touches the ball beyond the line, a subsequent catch or recovery by the
kicking team is legal, but the ball is dead. In the event of such a catch or recovery, it is first-and-10 for the kickers, or if the ball is
caught or recovered by the kickers in the receiver’s end zone, it is a touchdown for the kickers (7-3-1-d).
Item 2. Illegal Catch or Recovery. If the kickers catch or recover a kick beyond the line that has not been touched beyond the
line by the receiving team, the ball is dead, and it is first-and-10 for the receivers at the spot of catch or recovery (see 11-4-2 for
missed field goals). If a kick from behind the line is touched by the receiving team behind the line, such touching does not make
the kicking team eligible to catch or recover the kick beyond the line.
Item 3. Touchback. If a player of the kicking team illegally catches or recovers a scrimmage kick, other than a field goal attempt
from beyond the 20-yard line and touches the goal line with any part of his body while in possession of the ball, the ball is dead,
and the result of the play is a touchback. For a missed field goal from beyond the 20-yard line, see 11-4-2.
ARTICLE 3. RECEIVERS CATCH OR RECOVERY. If the receivers catch or recover any kick, they may advance. For fair catch
exception, see 10-2. For the exception for a ball that has crossed the goal line, see 9-4-1.
ARTICLE 4. SIMULTANEOUS CATCH OR RECOVERY. When a legal kick is simultaneously caught or recovered anywhere by
two eligible opposing players, or if the ball is lying on the field of play with no player attempting to recover it, it is awarded to the
receivers (3-27; 7-2-1-i).
SECTION 4 BALL CROSSES GOAL LINE, TOUCHES GOAL POSTS, OUT OF BOUNDS, DEAD IN FIELD OF PLAY
ARTICLE 1. BALL CROSSES RECEIVERS’ GOAL LINE. If a scrimmage kick crosses the receivers’ goal line from the impetus
of the kick, the following shall apply:
(a) If the ball has not been touched by a player of the receiving team beyond the line of scrimmage, it is dead immediately, and
the result of the play is a touchback, when:
(1) it touches the ground on or behind the receivers’ goal line;
(2) it touches a player of the kicking team who is touching the ground on or behind the receivers’ goal line; or
(3) it touches a player of the kicking team who has touched the ground on or behind the receivers’ goal line and has not reestablished
himself in the field of play. See 11-4-2 for options for missed field goals beyond the 20-yard line.
(b) If the receivers catch the ball in the end zone or recover it in the end zone after touching it in the field of play or the end zone,
they may advance.
(c) If the kickers catch or recover the ball in the end zone after the receivers first touch the ball in the field of play or the end zone,
it is a touchdown for the kickers.
(d) If there is a spot of first touching by the kickers outside the receivers’ 20-yard line, the receiving team has the option to take
possession of the ball at the spot of the first touching.
(e) If the scrimmage kick is a punt, and the ball goes out of bounds in the field of play after being touched by a receiver in the
end zone or in the field of play, it is the receiving team’s ball at the out of bounds spot.
ARTICLE 2. KICK TOUCHES RECEIVERS’ GOAL POSTS. If a missed field goal or Try, or a punt, has touched the receivers’
goal post, uprights, or crossbar, the ball is dead in the receivers’ end zone, and all customary rules pertaining to punts, missed
field goals, and Trys apply.
ARTICLE 3. KICK TOUCHES KICKERS’ GOAL POSTS. If a scrimmage kick touches the kickers’ goal post, uprights, or crossbar,
the ball is dead, and it is a safety. See 11-5-1.
ARTICLE 4. BALL OUT OF BOUNDS OR NOT RECOVERED IN FIELD OF PLAY. If a scrimmage kick goes out of bounds
between the goal lines or is lying in the field of play with no player attempting to recover it, it is the receivers’ ball at the dead ball
spot, unless the special rules for missed field goals in 11-4-2 apply.
SECTION 5 SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE 1. SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT. If there is a foul from the time of the snap until a legal scrimmage kick ends,
enforcement is from the previous spot. This includes a foul during a run prior to a legal kick, and a foul by the kicking team during
a missed field goal attempt.
Exceptions:
(1) If the offensive team commits a foul in its own end zone, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that
spot.
(2) If there is a foul by the kicking team, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, the receiving team
will have the option of taking the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down or adding the penalty yardage on
to the dead ball spot.
Notes:
(a) The dead ball spot for scrimmage kicks that result in a touchback is the 20-yard line (see 11-4-2-b for a missed field
goal from beyond the 20-yard line).
(b) If there is a foul for an illegal touch inside the five-yard line, the receiving team also has the option of accepting a
touchback.
(c) If there is a foul by the kicking team during a missed field goal attempt where the receiving team is awarded the ball
(see 11-4-2), enforcement is from the succeeding spot.
(3) Penalties for fair catch interference, interference with an opportunity to make a catch, an invalid fair catch signal, or a
personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal are enforced from the spot of the foul. If the personal foul is not part of a
double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, it may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See
14-2-4.
(4) Except for fouls that are committed in an attempt to block the kick (such as running into or roughing the kicker, defensive
holding (pull-and-shoot), leverage, leaping, and pushing teammate(s) into the offensive formation), if the receiving team
commits a foul during a scrimmage kick play that crosses the line of scrimmage, the penalty for its infraction will be
enforced as if it had been in possession of the ball at the time the foul occurred (a post-possession foul), provided that
the receiving team does not lose possession of the ball at any time during the down. The penalty shall be enforced from
whichever of the following spots is least beneficial to the receiving team:
(a) the end of the kick; or
(b) the spot of the foul.
If the foul occurs in the end zone, it is deemed to have occurred at the 20-yard line, unless enforcement results in a safety
(14-4-4).
(5) For enforcement of a personal or unsportsmanlike conduct foul on a play that results in a score, see 14-2-3; for an illegal
bat, see 12-5-1; and for illegally kicking a loose ball, see 12-5-2.
When Team B establishes possession of the ball, a scrimmage kick ends, and a running play begins, and fouls that occur thereafter
are enforced from the dead ball spot or the spot of the foul (three-and-one method, 14-3-6).