RULE 7 BALL IN PLAY, DEAD BALL, SCRIMMAGE
SECTION 1 BALL IN PLAY
ARTICLE 1. LIVE BALL. After the ball has been declared ready for play, it becomes a live ball when it is legally snapped or
legally kicked (a free kick or fair catch kick). The ball remains dead if it is snapped or kicked before it is made ready for play.
SECTION 2 DEAD BALL
ARTICLE 1. DEAD BALL DECLARED. An official shall declare the ball dead and the down ended:
(a) when a runner is contacted by an opponent and touches the ground with any part of his body other than his hands (including
the wrist) or feet (including the ankle);
(b) when a runner is held or otherwise restrained so that his forward progress ends;
(c) when a quarterback immediately drops to his knee, or simulates dropping to his knee, behind or beyond the line of scrimmage;
Note: If a quarterback does not immediately drop to a knee, and contact from a rushing defender is unavoidable, it is not a
foul unless the defender commits some other act that would constitute unnecessary roughness.
(d) when a runner declares himself down by:
(1) falling to the ground or kneeling, and clearly making no immediate effort to advance; or
(2) sliding or diving. When a runner slides or dives feet or head first or simulates sliding or diving, the ball is dead the instant
he touches the ground with anything other than his hands or his feet, or begins to simulate touching the ground;
Notes:
(1) Defenders are required to treat a sliding or diving runner as they would a runner who is down by contact.
(2) A defender must pull up when a runner begins a slide or dive. This does not mean that all contact by a defender is illegal.
If a defender has already committed himself, and the contact is unavoidable, it is not a foul unless the defender makes
forcible contact into the head or neck area of the runner with the helmet, shoulder, or forearm, or commits some other
act that is unnecessary roughness.
(3) A runner who desires to take advantage of this protection is responsible for starting his slide or dive before contact by a
defensive player is imminent; if he does not and waits until the last moment to begin his slide or dive, he puts himself in
jeopardy of being contacted.
(e) when a runner is out of bounds;
(f) when an opponent takes a ball that is in the possession of a runner who is on the ground;
(g) when a forward pass (legal or illegal) is incomplete (See 8-1-4);
(h) when any legal or illegal kick touches the receivers’ goal posts or crossbar;
(i) when a loose ball comes to rest anywhere in the field, and no player attempts to recover it; the official covering the play should
pause momentarily before signaling that the ball is dead. Any legal (or illegal) kick is awarded to the receivers, and any other
ball is awarded to the team last in possession. When awarded to a team behind a goal line, the ball is placed on the one-yard
line;
(j) when any legal or illegal kick is caught or recovered by the kickers, except a scrimmage kick that is kicked from behind the
line and is recovered behind the line (See 9-3-2-Item 3 for exception);
(k) when a kickoff or safety kick first touches the ground or a player in advance of the front yard line of the landing zone;
(l) when an onside kick goes untouched beyond the onside kick setup zone;
(m) when a touchdown, touchback, safety, field goal, or Try has been made;
(n) when any receiver catches or recovers the ball after a fair catch signal (valid or invalid) has been made, provided the ball has
not been touched by an opponent, before or after it strikes the ground;
(o) when an official sounds the whistle erroneously while the ball is still in play;
(1) If the ball is in player possession, the team in possession may elect to put the ball in play where it has been declared
dead or to replay the down.
(2) If the ball is a loose ball resulting from a fumble, backward pass, or illegal forward pass, the team last in possession may
elect to put the ball in play at the spot where possession was lost or to replay the down.
(3) If the ball is a loose ball resulting from a legal forward pass, a free kick, a fair catch kick, or a scrimmage kick, the ball is
returned to the previous spot, and the down is replayed.
(4) If there is a foul by either team during any of the above, and the team in possession at the time of the erroneous whistle
elects not to replay the down, penalty enforcement is the same as for fouls during a run, forward pass, kick, fumble, and
backward pass. If the team in possession elects to replay the down, all penalties will be disregarded, except for personal
fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls, which will be administered prior to the replaying of the down. If the down is
replayed, the game clock will be reset to the time remaining when the snap occurred, and the clock will start on the snap.
(p) when a fumble is recovered or caught by a teammate of the fumbling player, and the fumble occurs on a play that is subject
to the “two-minute”, “Try”, or “fourth-down” fumble provisions (See 8-7-5 and 8-7-6);
(q) when the ball is out of bounds;
(r) if a loose ball in play strikes a video board, guide wire, sky cam, or any other object, the ball will be dead immediately, and
the down will be replayed at the previous spot. In the event the down is replayed, the game clock will be reset to the time
remaining when the snap occurred, and the clock will start on the snap. All penalties will be disregarded, except for personal
fouls or unsportsmanlike conduct fouls, which will be administered prior to the replaying of the down; or
(s) when a runner’s helmet comes completely off.
ARTICLE 2. BALL TOUCHES OFFICIAL. The ball is not dead because it touches an official who is inbounds, or because of a
signal by an official other than a whistle.
SECTION 3 NEW SERIES OF DOWNS
ARTICLE 1. NEW SERIES FOR TEAM A. A new series of four scrimmage downs is awarded to Team A when the following
conditions exist:
(a) During a given series, the ball is declared dead in possession of Team A while at or beyond the line to gain;
(b) Enforcement of a foul by Team B results in the placement of the ball at or beyond the line to gain,
or if the enforcement of a foul awards an automatic first down to Team A;
(c) If there is a change of possession during the down, and Team A has possession at the end of the down;
(d) The kicking team recovers a scrimmage kick anywhere in the field of play after it first has been touched beyond the line of
scrimmage by the receivers; or
(e) The kicking team legally recovers a free kick.
ARTICLE 2. NEW SERIES FOR TEAM B. A new series of four scrimmage downs is awarded to Team B when the following
conditions exist:
(a) Team A fails to advance the ball to the line to gain during a series of downs;
(b) There is a change of possession during the down, and Team B has possession at the end of the down, or has been awarded
possession at the end of the down; or
(c) When the ball is declared dead in possession of the receiving team after a free kick, scrimmage kick, or fair catch kick.
ARTICLE 3. FORWARD PART OF BALL. The forward part of the ball in its position when it is declared dead in the field of play
shall be the determining point in measuring any distance gained or lost. The ball shall be rotated so that its long axis is parallel to
the sidelines before measuring while maintaining the forward most point. When an airborne player of either team completes a
catch or interception inbounds after an opponent has driven him backward, the ball is declared dead, and forward progress is
awarded at the spot where initial contact by the opponent was made after the player established control of the ball while in the air.
SECTION 4 ACTION AT OR BEFORE THE SNAP
ARTICLE 1. BALL READY FOR PLAY. After the neutral zone has been established (ball is made or declared ready for play), an
offensive player may not make a false start, a defensive player may not encroach (initiate contact with a member of the offensive
team) or commit a neutral zone infraction, and no player of either team may be offside when the ball is put in play.
ARTICLE 2. FALSE START. It is a false start if the ball has been placed ready for play, and, prior to the snap, an offensive player
who has assumed a set position moves in such a way as to simulate the start of a play, or if an offensive player who is in motion
makes a sudden movement toward the line of scrimmage. Any quick abrupt movement by a single offensive player, or by several
offensive players in unison, which simulates the start of the snap, is a false start, and the official shall blow the whistle immediately,
whether the snap is made or there is a reaction by the defense. For actions by a defensive player who attempts to cause an
offensive player to commit a false start, see 4-6-5-d.
Item 1. Interior Lineman. It is a false start if an interior lineman (tackle to tackle) takes or simulates a three-point stance and then
changes his position or moves the hand that is on the ground.
An interior lineman who is in a two-point stance is permitted to reset in a three-point stance or change his position, provided that
he comes to a complete stop prior to the snap. If he does not come to a complete stop prior to the snap, it is a false start.
Item 2. Eligible Receiver. If all offensive players have been set for at least one full second, and an eligible receiver who is on
the line of scrimmage moves forward, it is a false start, regardless of whether the action is quick and abrupt or slow and
deliberate.
If an eligible receiver who is on the line of scrimmage moves backward or changes his stance (two point to three point or
conversely) and does not come to a complete stop before the snap, it is a false start.
Any eligible backfield player who changes his stance does not have to come to a complete stop prior to the snap, as long as his
actions are not abrupt (false start) or forward (illegal motion).
Item 3. T-Formation Quarterback. It is legal for a T-Formation Quarterback to go in motion, whether he has placed his hands
under center, on his knees, or on the body of the center. However, it is a false start if the action is quick and abrupt. If the player
fails to come to a complete stop for at least one full second prior to the ball being snapped, it is illegal motion.
Item 4. Shotgun Formation. A player who is in position to receive the snap in shotgun formation is permitted to shift his feet prior
to the snap, but any quick and abrupt movement is a false start. This includes thrusting his hands forward when there is not a
simultaneous snap.
Item 5. Attempt to Draw Offside. Any obvious attempt by the quarterback or other player in position to receive the snap to draw
an opponent offside is a false start.
Item 6. Shift Converts to False Start. With the game clock running after the two-minute warning of either half, if all offensive
players are not set simultaneously for one full second prior to the snap, it is a false start. If all players get set, and then two or
more players shift without resetting prior to the snap, it is a live ball foul for an illegal shift (7-4-7).
Penalty: For a false start: Loss of five yards from the line of scrimmage. The penalty is enforced prior to the snap.
ARTICLE 3. ENCROACHMENT. It is encroachment if a defensive player enters the neutral zone and contacts an offensive player
or the ball prior to the snap, or if he interferes with the ball during the snap. Officials are to blow their whistles immediately.
Penalty: For encroachment: Loss of five yards from the line of scrimmage. The penalty is enforced prior to the snap.
ARTICLE 4. NEUTRAL ZONE INFRACTION. It is a neutral zone infraction when the following occur. Officials are to blow their
whistles immediately:
(a) a defender moves beyond the neutral zone prior to the snap and is parallel to or beyond an offensive lineman with an
unimpeded path to the quarterback or kicker, even though no contact is made by a blocker;
(b) a defender enters the neutral zone prior to the snap, causing the offensive player(s) in close proximity (including a T-Formation
Quarterback) to react (move) immediately to protect himself (themselves) against impending contact. If there is no immediate
reaction by the offensive player(s) in close proximity, and the defensive player returns to a legal position prior to the snap
without contacting an opponent, there is no foul. A flexed or split receiver is considered to be in close proximity if he is lined
up on the side of the ball on which the violation occurs; other offensive players are considered to be in close proximity if they
are within two-and-one-half positions of the defender who enters the neutral zone. If the defender is directly over the center,
a T-Formation Quarterback, the center, and the guards and tackles on both sides of the center are considered to be within
close proximity; if the defender is in a gap, the two offensive players on either side of the gap are considered to be within
close proximity (including a T-Formation Quarterback, if applicable); or
(c) during the last two minutes of a half the ball is snapped before all members of the defensive team are on their side of the line
of scrimmage. The offense must be legally set.
Penalty: For a neutral zone infraction: Loss of five yards from line of scrimmage. Penalty is enforced prior to snap.
ARTICLE 5. OFFSIDE. A player is offside when any part of his body is in or beyond the neutral zone or beyond a restraining line
for an onside kick when the ball is put in play.
Penalty: For offside: Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 6. COMPLETE STOP. All offensive players are required to come to a complete stop and be in a set position
simultaneously for at least one full second prior to the snap. Failure to do so is an illegal shift (see 7-4-2-Item 6 for such an illegal
shift foul after the two-minute warning of either half which converts to a false start).
ARTICLE 7. SHIFTS. The offensive team must present a legal formation before and after a shift. It is permitted to shift and have
two or more players in motion multiple times before the snap. However, after the last shift, all players must come to a complete
stop and be in a set position simultaneously for at least one full second.
If any eligible backfield player goes in motion (one at a time) after the last shift and comes to a complete stop, there is no
requirement for a full second pause before a second player can legally go in motion.
However, if the first player has not come to a complete stop when the second player goes in motion, it is another shift and requires
another simultaneous stop for at least one full second by all players.
It is also an illegal shift if a T-Formation Quarterback goes in motion and fails to come to a complete stop for at least one full
second before a second player goes in motion.
Penalty: For an illegal shift: Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 8. ILLEGAL MOTION. When the ball is snapped, one player who is lined up in the backfield may be in motion, provided
that he is moving parallel to or away from the line of scrimmage. No player is permitted to be moving toward the line of scrimmage
when the ball is snapped. All other players must be stationary in their positions.
If an eligible receiver who is on the line moves to another position on the line (not forward), he must come to a complete stop prior
to the snap. If he does not come to a complete stop, it is illegal motion.
It is also illegal motion if a T-Formation Quarterback goes in motion and fails to come to a complete stop for at least one full second
prior to the snap.
Penalty: For a player illegally in motion at the snap: Loss of five yards.
SECTION 5 POSITION OF PLAYERS AT THE SNAP
ARTICLE 1. OFFENSIVE TEAM. The offensive team must comply with the following at the snap:
(a) It must have seven or more players on the line, who may lock legs (3-18).
(b) Eligible receivers must be on both ends of the line, and all of the players on the line between them must be ineligible receivers.
(c) No player may be out of bounds.
(d) No player may take a position that is neither clearly on, nor clearly off the line of scrimmage, unless he is directly behind the
snapper. Only one player may be in such a position, and he must wear an eligible number, unless he has reported in
accordance with Rule 5, Section 3, Article 1. Regardless of number or reporting status, this player must comply with all rules
pertaining to motion (7-4-8) and eligibility (8-1-5, 8-1-6 and 8-3-1).
(e) Players in eligible positions must wear an eligible number, unless they have reported in accordance with Rule 5, Section 3,
Article 1.
Penalty: For illegal formation by the offense: Loss of five yards.
SECTION 6 PUTTING THE BALL IN PLAY
ARTICLE 1. BALL IN PLAY. The offensive team must put the ball in play with a snap at the spot where the previous down ended,
unless the enforcement of a penalty moves the ball to another spot or the down ended outside the inbounds lines. If a fair catch
kick is chosen after a fair catch, 10-2-4 and 11-4-3 apply.
ARTICLE 2. SNAP AT INBOUNDS SPOT. The ball is next put in play at the inbounds spot by the team entitled to possession (7-
1-1 and 7-4-1) when:
(a) a loose ball other than an incomplete forward pass is out of bounds between the goal lines;
(b) a runner is out of bounds between the goal lines;
(c) the ball is dead in a side zone (see 1-1-1);
(d) the ball is placed in the side zone as the result of a penalty enforcement; or
(e) a fair catch is made or awarded in a side zone.
ARTICLE 3. RESTRICTIONS FOR SNAPPER. The snap (3-31) may be made by any offensive player who is on the line of
scrimmage but must conform to the following provisions:
(a) The snap must start with the ball on the ground, with its long axis at right angles to the line.
(b) It is not necessary that the snap be between the snapper’s legs, but it must be one quick and continuous motion of the hand
or hands of the snapper. The ball must leave or be taken from his hands during this motion.
(c) The snapper may not snap the ball after it is ready for play until all of the officials have had a reasonable time to assume their
normal positions. If this occurs, the ball remains dead, and no penalty is assessed unless it is a repeated act after a warning
(delay of game).
Penalty: For illegally snapping the ball: Loss of five yards from the line of scrimmage.
ARTICLE 4. LEGAL SNAP. A snap is a backward pass. The snap must be received by a player who is not on the line of
scrimmage at the snap, unless the ball first strikes the ground. If the ball first strikes the ground, or is muffed by an eligible backfield
receiver, or a T-Formation Quarterback, it can be recovered and advanced by any player.
Penalty: For snapping the ball to a player who is ineligible to receive the snap: Loss of five yards from the line of
scrimmage. The whistle shall be blown immediately.