RULE 5 PLAYERS, SUBSTITUTES, EQUIPMENT, GENERAL RULES
SECTION 1 PLAYERS
ARTICLE 1. NUMBER OF PLAYERS. The game is played by two teams of 11 players each.
If Team A has more than 11 players in its formation for more than three seconds, or if Team B has more than 11 players in its
formation and the snap is imminent, it is a foul. Once the ball is made ready for play, if either team has more than 11 players in its
formation prior to a free kick, it is also a foul. In these instances, game officials shall blow their whistles immediately and not allow
the snap or kick to occur.
Penalty: For more than 11 players in the formation prior to the snap or free kick: Loss of five yards from the succeeding
spot.
If a team has more than 11 players on the field of play or the end zone when a snap, free kick, or fair catch kick is made, the ball
is in play, and it is a foul.
Exception: If Team A is using a designated holder pursuant to 6-1-1-Note, the designated holder may be the 12th person on
the field when the ball is kicked for a kickoff or safety kick, but he is a non-player and must leave the field on his team’s sideline
with the kicking tee immediately after the ball is kicked (5-2-8-h) and is also subject to the rules of non-player conduct in
accordance with Rule 13.
Penalty: For more than 11 players on the field of play or the end zone while the ball is in play: Loss of five yards from the
previous spot.
ARTICLE 2. PLAYERS NUMBERED BY POSITION. All players must wear numerals on their jerseys in accordance with Rule 5,
Section 4, Article 3, Item 3. Such numerals must be by playing position, as follows:
(a) quarterbacks: 0-19;
(b) punters and placekickers: 0-49 and 90-99;
(c) defensive backs: 0-49;
(d) running backs, fullbacks, tight ends, H-backs, and wide receivers: 0-49 and 80-89;
(e) offensive linemen: 50-79;
(f) defensive linemen: 50-79 and 90-99;
(g) linebackers: 0-59 and 90-99.
Eligible pass receivers and a T-Formation Quarterback must be wearing numerals 0-49 or 80-89. All other numerals are worn by
ineligible players unless they report a change in their position. See 5-3-1.
If a player changes his position during his playing career in the NFL, and such change moves him from a position as an ineligible
pass receiver to that of an eligible pass receiver, or from a position as an eligible pass receiver to that of an ineligible pass receiver,
he must be issued an appropriate new jersey numeral. A change in jersey numeral is not required if the change is from an ineligible
position to another ineligible position, or from an eligible position to another eligible position, provided that the player has
participated at least one season at his position prior to the change.
Any request to wear a numeral for a special position not specified above must be made to the Commissioner. During the preseason
period when playing rosters are larger, the League will allow duplication and other temporary deviations from the numbering
scheme specified above, but the rule must be adhered to for all players during the regular season and postseason. Clubs must
make numerals available to adhere to the rule, even if it requires returning to circulation a numeral that has been retired or withheld
for other reasons. See 5-3-1 for reporting a change of position.
SECTION 2 SUBSTITUTES AND WITHDRAWN PLAYERS
ARTICLE 1. NUMBER OF PLAYERS IN HUDDLE. There can never be more than 11 players in the offensive huddle while the
play clock is running. It is a foul, the whistle is blown immediately, and the ball remains dead. See 5-2-8-a.
ARTICLE 2. SUBSTITUTE BECOMES PLAYER. A substitute becomes a player when he:
(a) participates in at least one play (including a play negated by penalty prior to the snap or during the play); or
(b) is on the field of play or the end zone when a snap, fair catch kick, or free kick is made, or when such a play is imminent.
A player becomes a substitute when he is withdrawn from the game and does not participate in at least one play. A play negated
by penalty prior to the snap or during the play counts as a missed play.
ARTICLE 3. LEGAL SUBSTITUTIONS. Any number of substitutes may enter the field of play or end zone while the ball is dead.
ARTICLE 4. ILLEGAL SUBSTITUTIONS. If a substitute enters the field of play or end zone while the ball is in play, it is an illegal
substitution. If an illegal substitute interferes with the play, it may be a palpably unfair act (see 12-3-4).
ARTICLE 5. OFFENSIVE SUBSTITUTIONS. The substitution rules are intended to prevent teams from using simulated
substitutions to confuse an opponent, while still permitting a player (or players) to enter and leave without participating in a play in
certain situations, such as a change in a coaching decision on fourth down, even though he has approached the huddle and
communicated with a teammate or an official. Similarly, if a player who participated in the previous play leaves the playing field by
mistake, and returns to the playing field prior to the snap, he is not required to reach the inside of the field numerals, provided the
defense has the opportunity to match up with him. However, a substitute (i.e., someone who did not participate in the previous
play) is required to reach the inside of the field numerals. The following are applicable to any offensive substitute who is entering
the game:
(a) He must move onto the field of play or the end zone as far as the inside of the field numerals prior to the snap to be a legal
substitution. If he does not and is on the field of play or end zone at the time of a legal snap, he is an illegal substitute.
(b) If he approaches the huddle and communicates with a teammate or an official, he is required to participate in at least one
play before being withdrawn. After a warning, subsequent violations of this rule shall be penalized for unsportsmanlike
conduct. See 5-2-11.
ARTICLE 6. WITHDRAWN PLAYERS. A player or players who have been replaced must leave the playing field or end zone on
their own team’s side between the end lines prior to the next snap, free kick, or fair catch kick.
ARTICLE 7. DISQUALIFIED AND SUSPENDED PLAYERS. A player must be withdrawn and substituted for when he is
disqualified (12-2, 12-3) or suspended (5-4). A suspended player may re-enter after at least one legal snap, provided that the
reason for his suspension has been corrected. A disqualified player must leave the playing field enclosure and go to the team
locker room within a reasonable time.
ARTICLE 8. PENALTIES FOR ILLEGAL SUBSTITUTION OR WITHDRAWAL. Penalties are:
(a) For 12 or more players in the offensive huddle (whistle blown immediately and ball remains dead): Loss of five yards
from the succeeding spot.
(b) For a substitute entering the field during a live ball: Loss of five yards.
(c) For interference with the play by a substitute who enters the field during a live ball: Palpably unfair act. See 12-3-4.
(d) For an offensive substitute who does not move onto the field as far as the inside of the field numerals: Loss of five
yards from the previous spot.
(e) For a withdrawn player clearing the field on the opponent’s side or across an end line: Loss of five yards from the
previous spot.
(f) For illegal return of a suspended player: Loss of five yards from the previous spot if discovery is made while the ball
is in play or prior to the start of the next down. If the previous spot is not definitely known, enforcement is five yards
from the succeeding spot as a foul between downs. See 14-4-9.
(g) For return of a disqualified player: Loss of 15 yards from the previous spot if discovery is made while the ball is in
play, or 15 yards from the succeeding spot if discovered between downs, and, in either case, exclusion from the
playing field enclosure.
(h) For a designated holder clearing the field on the opponent’s side or across an end line: Loss of five yards.
ARTICLE 9. PROCEDURE FOLLOWING TIMEOUT OR CHANGE OF POSSESSION. Following a timeout or change of
possession, the offense may huddle outside the numbers near its bench area, but will not be allowed to line up and snap the ball
before the defense has an opportunity to match personnel. If the offense snaps the ball before the defense has had an opportunity
to complete its substitutions, and a defensive foul for too many players on the field results, no penalties will be enforced, except
for personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls, and the down will be replayed. At this time, the Referee will notify the head
coach that any further use of this tactic will result in a penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct.
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct after a warning: Loss of 15 yards from the succeeding spot.
ARTICLE 10. DEFENSIVE MATCHUPS FOLLOWING SUBSTITUTIONS. If a substitution is made by the offense before the twominute
warning of either half, the offense shall not be permitted to snap the ball until the defense has been permitted to respond
with its substitutions. While in the process of a substitution (or simulated substitution), the offense is prohibited from rushing quickly
to the line of scrimmage and snapping the ball in an obvious attempt to cause a defensive foul (i.e., too many men on the field). If
the offense substitutes, the following procedure will apply:
(a) The Umpire will stand over the ball until the Referee deems that the defense has had a reasonable time to complete its
substitutions.
(b) If the offense snaps the ball before the defense has had an opportunity to complete its substitutions, and a defensive foul for
too many players on the field results, no penalties will be enforced, except for personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct,
and the down will be replayed. At this time, the Referee will notify the head coach that any further use of this tactic will result
in a penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct. The game clock will be reset to the time remaining when the snap occurred, and
the clock will start on the snap.
(c) On a fourth-down punting situation, the Referee and the Umpire will not allow a quick snap that prevents the defense from
having a reasonable time to complete its substitutions. This applies throughout the entire game.
(d) If the play clock expires before the defense has completed its substitution, it is delay of game by the offense.
ARTICLE 11. UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT. Using entering substitutes, legally returning players, substitutes on sidelines,
or withdrawn players to confuse opponents, or lingering by players leaving the field when being replaced by a substitute, is
unsportsmanlike conduct. See 12-3-1-k. The offense is prevented from sending simulated substitutions onto the field toward its
huddle and returning them to the sideline without completing the substitution in an attempt to confuse the defense.
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct: Loss of 15 yards.
SECTION 3 CHANGES IN POSITION
ARTICLE 1. REPORTING CHANGE OF POSITION. An offensive player wearing the number of an ineligible pass receiver (50–
79 and 90–99) is permitted to line up in the position of an eligible pass receiver or T-Formation Quarterback (0–49 and 80–89).
An offensive player wearing the number of an eligible pass receiver is permitted to line up in the position of an ineligible pass
receiver, provided he lines up within the normal five-player core formed by ineligible players and is not more than two players
removed from the middle player of a seven-player line.
In both cases, the player must immediately report the change in his eligibility status to the Referee, who will inform the defensive
team. He must participate in such eligible or ineligible position as long as he is continuously in the game, but prior to each play
he must again report his status to the Referee, who will inform the defensive team. The game clock shall not be stopped, and the
ball shall not be put in play until the Referee takes his normal position.
ARTICLE 2. RETURNING TO ORIGINAL POSITION. A player who has reported a change in his eligibility status to the Referee
is permitted to return to a position indicated by the eligibility status of his number after:
(a) a team time out;
(b) the end of a quarter;
(c) the two-minute warning;
(d) a foul;
(e) a replay review;
(f) a touchdown;
(g) a kick from scrimmage;
(h) a change of possession; or
(i) the player has been withdrawn for one legal snap.
Penalty: For a player failing to notify the Referee of a change in his status when required, or an offensive player with an
eligible number reports as ineligible and lines up outside normal five-player core: Loss of five yards for illegal
substitution.
ARTICLE 3. SPEAKERS IN HELMETS. The Coach-to-Player system allows a member of the coaching staff in the bench area
or the coaches’ booth to communicate to a designated offensive or defensive player with a speaker in his helmet. The
communication begins once a game official has signaled a down to be over and is cut off when the play clock reaches 15 seconds
or the ball is snapped, whichever occurs first.
Each offensive and defensive team is permitted no more than one player on the field with a speaker in his helmet. Each team is
permitted to have a maximum of three active radio receivers to be used on offense by its quarterbacks, and a maximum of three
active radio receivers to be used on defense by players who have been designated as primary and backup users.
Clubs that have a player whose principal position is as a non-quarterback (e.g., wide receiver, running back) and who also is used
as a quarterback from time to time must have two helmets for that player—one with and one without radio components.
When a quarterback enters the game for the first time or re-enters the game if he has previously been in the game and removed,
he must report to the Referee.
Whenever the backup defensive user enters or re-enters the game wearing a helmet with a speaker, he must report to the Umpire.
If the primary defensive user subsequently re-enters the game wearing a helmet with a speaker, he must report to the Umpire. If
the primary and backup players have been removed from the game, no other player may wear the radio speaker in his helmet.
Teams must use other methods to communicate signals to their players.
It is not necessary that the offensive player with the speaker in his helmet receive the snap.
For special teams’ plays, only one player per team with a receiver will be permitted on the field.
All players that have radio components in their helmet must have a decal, supplied by the League, displayed on the midline of the
rear of the helmet. Players who have speakers in their helmets must be identified in the Communication System section of the
Game Day Administration Report that is submitted to the Referee or a member of his crew no later than one hour and 30 minutes
prior to kickoff.
For additional requirements and policies pertaining to the system, including regulations for the storage of a backup helmet for a
non-quarterback who is used as a quarterback, or for the backup defensive player’s helmet, please refer to the Policy Manual for
Member Clubs/Game Operations.
Penalty: For a player failing to notify the Referee or Umpire of a change in his status when required: Loss of five yards
for illegal substitution.
SECTION 4 EQUIPMENT, UNIFORMS, PLAYER APPEARANCE
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL POLICY. Throughout the game day period while in view of the stadium and television audience, including
during team pregame warm-ups, all players must dress in a professional manner under the uniform standards. The helmet and
mandatory padding referenced in Article 3 below are intended to provide reasonable protection to a player while reasonably
avoiding risk of injury to other players. The development of Playing Rules should be governed by this Article. Players generally
must present an appearance that is appropriate to representing their individual clubs and the National Football League. The term
uniform, as used in this policy, applies to every piece of equipment worn by a player, including helmet, shoulder pads, thigh pads,
knee pads, and any other item of protective gear, and to every visible item of apparel, including but not limited to pants, jerseys,
wristbands, gloves, game socks and/or leg coverings, shoes, visible undergarments, and accessories such as headwear worn
under helmets and hand towels. All visible items worn on game day by players must be issued by the club or the League, or, if
from outside sources, must have approval in advance by the League office.
ARTICLE 2. TEAM COLORS. Pursuant to the official colors established for each NFL club in the League Constitution and Bylaws,
playing squads are permitted to wear only those colors or a combination of those colors for helmets, jerseys, pants, and game
socks and/or leg coverings; provided that white is also an available color for jerseys and mandatory color for the lower portion of
game socks and/or leg coverings. (See 5-4-3-Item 6, “Game socks and/or Leg Coverings,” below). Each player on a given team
must wear the same colors on his uniform as all other players on his team in the same game. Home clubs shall choose their jersey
color (either white or official team color) and visiting clubs must wear the opposite. The two competing teams may wear jerseys in
their official colors (non-white), provided the Commissioner determines that such colors are of sufficient contrast.
ARTICLE 3. MANDATORY EQUIPMENT, APPAREL. All players must wear the equipment and uniform apparel listed below,
which must be of a suitably protective nature and must be designed and produced by a professional football equipment
manufacturer. All components recommended by the manufacturer must be present and must not be cut, reduced in size, or
otherwise altered unless for medical reasons approved in advance by the Commissioner. During pregame team warm-ups, players
may omit certain protective equipment at their option, except that helmets, shoulder pads, thigh pads, and knee pads must be
worn.
Item 1. Helmet, Face Protectors. Helmet with all points of the chin strap (white only) fastened and facemask attached. Facemasks
must not be more than ⅝-inch in diameter and must be made of rounded material; transparent materials are prohibited. Clear
(transparent) plastic eye shields are optional. Tinted eye shields may be worn only after the League office is supplied with
appropriate medical documentation and approval is subsequently granted. The League office has final approval. No visible
identification of a manufacturer’s name or logo on the exterior of a helmet or on any attachment to a helmet is permitted unless
provided for under a commercial arrangement between the League and manufacturer; in no event is identification of any helmet
manufacturer permitted on the visible surface of a rear cervical pad. All helmets must carry a small NFL shield logo on the rear
lower-left exterior, and an approved warning label on the rear lower-right exterior. Both labels will be supplied in quantity by the
League office.
Item 2. Jerseys. Jersey must cover all pads and other protective equipment worn on the torso and upper arms, and must be
appropriately tailored to remain tucked into the uniform pants throughout the game. Jerseys are permitted to be hemmed but the
length must be long enough to cover the waist area. Skin exposure due to improperly wearing jerseys is prohibited at all times
throughout the game. Tear-away jerseys are prohibited. Mesh jerseys with large fishnet material (commonly referred to as “bullethole”
or “port-hole” mesh) are also prohibited. Surnames of players in letters a minimum of 2½ inches high must be affixed to the
exterior of jerseys across the upper back above the numerals; nicknames are prohibited. All jerseys must carry a small NFL Shield
logo at the middle of the yoke of the neck on the front of the garment. All fabrics must be approved by the League office prior to
production. For optional equipment permitted to be worn under jerseys, see 5-4-6 Item 1, “Garments Under Jersey” below.
Item 3. Numerals. Numerals on the back and front of jerseys as specified under NFL rules for the player’s specific position. Such
numerals must be a minimum of 8 inches high and 4 inches wide, and their color must be in sharp contrast with the color of the
jersey. Smaller numerals should be worn on the tops of the shoulders or upper arms of the jersey. Small numerals on the back of
the helmet or on the uniform pants are optional.
Item 4. Pants. Pants must be worn over the entire knee area; pants shortened or rolled up are prohibited. No part of the pants
may be cut away unless an appropriate gusset or other device is used to replace the removed material. All pants must carry a
small NFL Shield logo on the front left groin area of the pants, midway between the fly opening and side seam, and ½-inch below
the belt.
Item 5. Shoulder Pads, Thigh Pads, and Knee Pads. All players must wear shoulder pads, thigh pads, and knee pads which
have been approved by the League office. All pads must be covered by the outer uniform. Knee pads must be at least ¼-inch
thick and must cover the knees. Basketball-type knee pads are permitted but must be covered by the outer uniform. Punters and
placekickers may omit thigh and knee pads.
Item 6. Game Socks and/or Leg Coverings. Game socks and/or leg coverings must cover the entire area from the shoe to the
bottom of the pants and must meet the pants below the knee. Players are permitted to wear as many layers of game socks and/or
leg coverings and tape on the lower leg as they prefer, provided the exterior is either a: (a) one-piece game sock and/or leg
covering that includes solid white from the top of the shoe to the mid-point of the lower leg, and approved team color or colors
(non-white) from that point to the top of the game sock and/or leg covering; or (b) solid color game sock and/or leg covering (i.e.,
entire covering from bottom of pant leg to top of shoe), but all players must be in the same covering style and color in any particular
game. Solid game socks and/or leg coverings must be a consistent color from the bottom of the pant leg to the top of the shoe.
Uniform game socks and/or leg coverings may not be altered (e.g., over-stretched, cut at the toes, or sewn short) in order to bring
the line between solid white and team colors lower or higher than the mid-point of the lower leg. Skin exposure of the lower leg
and ankle area due to improper wear of game socks and/or leg coverings is prohibited at all times throughout the game. No other
game socks and/or leg coverings, and/or opaque tape, may be worn over the one-piece, two-color uniform game socks. Barefoot
punters and placekickers may omit the game sock and/or leg covering of the kicking foot in preparation for and during kicking
plays.
Item 7. Shoes. Shoes must be of standard football design, including “sneaker” type shoes such as basketball shoes, cross-training
shoes, etc. A player may wear shoes that are black, white, or any Constitutional team color, or any combination of black, white,
and a Constitutional team color. Each player may select among shoe styles previously approved by the League office. Logos,
names, or other commercial identification on shoes are not permitted to be visible unless advance approval is granted by the
League office. Size and location of logos and names on shoes must be approved by the League office. When a shoe logo or name
approved by the League is covered with an appropriate use of tape, players will be allowed to cut out the tape covering the original
logo or name, provided the cut is clean and is the exact size of the logo or name. The logo or name of the shoe manufacturer
must not be re-applied to the exterior of taped shoes unless advance approval is granted by the League office. Kicking shoes
must not be modified (including using a shoelace wrapped around toe and/or bottom of the shoe), and any shoe that is worn by a
player with an artificial limb on his kicking leg must have a kicking surface that conforms to that of a normal kicking shoe. Punters
and placekickers may omit the shoe from the kicking foot in preparation for and during kicking plays.
ARTICLE 4. OTHER PROHIBITED EQUIPMENT, APPAREL. In addition to the prohibited items of equipment and apparel
specified above, the following also are prohibited:
Item 1. Projecting Objects. Metal or other hard objects that project from a player’s person or uniform, including from his shoes.
Item 2. Uncovered Hard Objects, Substances. Hard objects, exposed jewelry, and substances, including but not limited to casts,
guards or braces for hand, wrist, forearm, elbow, hip, thigh, knee, and shin, unless such items are appropriately covered on all
edges and surfaces by a minimum of ⅜-inch foam rubber or similar soft material. Any such item worn to protect an injury must not
contain colors, designs, logos, or personal messages that are not approved by the NFL and must be reported by the applicable
coaching staff to the Umpire in advance of the game, and a description of the injury must be provided.
Item 3. Torn Items. Torn or improperly fitting equipment creating a risk of injury to other players, e.g., the hard surfaces of shoulder
pads exposed by a damaged jersey.
Item 4. Improper Cleats. Shoe cleats made of metal or other material that may chip, fracture, or develop a cutting edge. Conical
cleats with concave sides or points which measure less than ⅜-inch in diameter at the tips, or cleats with oblong ends which
measure less than ¼ by ¾-inch at the end tips are also prohibited. Nylon cleats with flat steel tips are permitted. A detachable
kicking toe is prohibited.
Item 5. Improper Tape. Opaque, contrasting-color tape that covers any part of the helmet, jersey, pants, game socks and/or leg
coverings, or shoes; transparent tape or tape of the same color as the background material is permissible for use on these items
of apparel. Players may use opaque white, black or one dominant club color tape on hands and arms, provided it conforms to
above (“Uncovered Hard Objects, Substances”) and below (“Approved Glove Color”). Opaque tape either black or white on shoes
is permitted, provided it is black or white to match the selected dominant shoe choice of the club and provided it does not carry up
into the game sock and/or leg covering area.
Item 6. Items Colored Like Football. Headgear or any other equipment or apparel which, in the opinion of the Referee, may
confuse an opponent because of its similarity in color to that of the game football. If such color is worn, it must be broken by stripes
or other patterns of sharply contrasting color or colors.
Item 7. Adhesive, Slippery Substances. Adhesive or slippery substances on the body, equipment, or uniform of any player;
provided, however, that players may wear gloves with a tackified surface if such tacky substance does not adhere to the football
or otherwise cause handling problems for players.
ARTICLE 5. RECOMMENDED EQUIPMENT. It is recommended that all players wear hip pads designed to reasonably avoid the
risk of injury. Unless otherwise provided by individual team policy, it is the player’s responsibility and decision whether to follow
this recommendation and use such pads. If worn, such pads must be covered by the outer uniform.
ARTICLE 6. OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT. Among the types of optional equipment that are permitted to be worn by players are the
following:
Item 1. Garments Under Jerseys. Quarterbacks will be allowed to wear under the game jersey a solid-colored T-shirt, turtleneck,
or sweatshirt (consistent with team undergarment color) with sleeves cut to any length, as long as both sleeves are evenly trimmed,
and the edges are sewn and hemmed. All other players may wear garments under game jerseys only if the undergarment sleeves
either (a) are full length to the wrist; or (b) are the half sleeve length as provided by the licensee each of which must be approved
by the NFL. Players may not wear long-sleeved undergarments that include pebble-grip sleeves. Undergarments should be tucked
in the uniform pants. Any undergarment that is untucked must not hang out from the bottom of the jersey in length longer than the
small NFL Shield logo and the manufacturer’s logo located on the front area of the uniform pants, or the undergarment must be
tucked in the uniform pants. Any garments under jerseys that are exposed at any point throughout the game and that carry an
exposed logo or commercial name/identification must be licensed and approved by the League office for wear on the field. All
members of the same team who wear approved undergarments with exposed necks or sleeves must wear the same color on a
given day, which color must be white or a solid color that is an official team color (solid means that sleeves must not carry stripes,
designs, or team names). Players may not wear undergarments with an exposed hood hanging outside the collar of the jersey.
Item 2. Approved Glove Color. Gloves, wrappings, elbow pads, and other items worn on the arms below or over the jersey
sleeves must be white, black or the official uniform color of the applicable team. Clubs are not required to designate to the League
office the color of gloves that will be worn by their players.
Item 3. Rib Protectors. Rib protectors (“flak jackets”) under the jersey.
Item 4. Wristbands. Wristbands, provided they are white, black, or an official uniform color of the applicable team only.
Item 5. Towels. Towels, provided they are white only, licensed towels approved by the League office for use on the playing field.
Players are prohibited from adding personal messages, logos, names, symbols, or illustrations. A player may wear no more than
one towel. Players are prohibited from discarding on the playing field any loose towels or other materials used for wiping hands
and the football. Streamers or ribbons, regardless of length, hanging from any part of the uniform are prohibited.
Item 6. Headwear. When players are on the field during the pregame, game, and postgame periods, they may wear approved
caps, skull caps and bands, approved cold weather gear, or other approved headwear for medical purposes only, as determined
by the Commissioner. Any permissible headwear must be approved by the League office, and if worn under the helmet, no portion
may hang from or otherwise be visible outside the helmet. Players are not permitted to wear bandanas or other unapproved
headwear anywhere on the field during the pregame, game, or postgame periods, even if such items are worn under their helmets.
ARTICLE 7. LOGOS AND COMMERCIAL IDENTIFICATION. Throughout the period on game day that a player is visible to the
stadium and television audience (including in pregame warm-ups, in the bench area, and during postgame interviews in the locker
room or on the field), players are prohibited from wearing, displaying, or orally promoting equipment, apparel, or other items that
carry commercial names or logos/identifications of companies, unless such commercial identification has been approved in
advance by the League office. The size of any approved logo or other commercial identification involved in an agreement between
a manufacturer and the League will be modest and unobtrusive, and there is no assurance that it will be visible to the television
audience.
ARTICLE 8. PERSONAL MESSAGES. Throughout the period on game day that a player is visible to the stadium and television
audience (including in pregame warm-ups, in the bench area, and during postgame interviews in the locker room or on the field),
players are prohibited from wearing, displaying, or otherwise conveying personal messages either in writing or illustration, unless
such message has been approved in advance by the League office. Items to celebrate anniversaries or memorable events, or to
honor or commemorate individuals, such as helmet decals, and arm bands and jersey patches on players’ uniforms, are prohibited
unless approved in advance by the League office. All such items approved by the League office, if any, must relate to team or
League events or personages. The League will not grant permission for any club or player to wear, display, or otherwise convey
messages, through helmet decals, arm bands, jersey patches, mouthpieces, or other items affixed to game uniforms or equipment,
which relate to political activities or causes, other non-football events, causes or campaigns, or charitable causes or campaigns.
Further, any such approved items must be modest in size, tasteful, non-commercial, and non-controversial; must not be worn for
more than one football season; and if approved for use by a specific team, must not be worn by players on other teams in the
League.
ARTICLE 9. GENERAL APPEARANCE. Consistent with the equipment and uniform rules, players must otherwise present a
professional and appropriate appearance while before the public on game day. Among the types of activity that are prohibited are
use of tobacco products (smokeless included) while in the bench area and use of facial makeup. In addition to the game day
penalties described in this rule, the Commissioner may subsequently impose independent disciplinary action on the club and
involved player, up to and including suspension from the team’s next game – preseason, regular season, or postseason, whichever
i s applicable.
Penalties:
a) For violation of this Section 4 discovered during pregame warm-ups or at other times prior to the game, player will
be advised to make appropriate correction; if the violation is not corrected, player will not be permitted to enter the
game.
b) For violation of this Section 4 that is discovered while player is in the game, and which involves the competitive or
player safety aspects of the game (e.g., illegal kicking toe of shoe, an adhesive or slippery substance, failure to wear
mandatory equipment), player will be removed from the game until he has complied.
c) For any other violation of this Section 4 (e.g., wristbands and mouthpieces that are not League-approved, towel with
a personal message, impermissible headwear under the helmet) that is discovered while the player is in the game,
player will be advised to make appropriate correction at the next change of possession; if the violation is not
corrected, player will not be permitted to enter the game.
d) For violation of this Section 4 detected in the bench area: Player and head coach will be asked to remove the
objectionable item, properly equip the player, or otherwise correct the violation. The involved player or players will
not be permitted to enter the game until the player has complied.
e) For illegal entry or return of a player suspended under this Section 4: Loss of five yards from succeeding spot and
removal until properly equipped after one down. See 3-32.
f) For repeat violation: Disqualification from game.
Notes:
(1) If a player is suspended for having adhesive or slippery substances on his body, equipment, or uniform, he must remain
out of the game for one play, even if there is a team time out, the two-minute warning, or the end of a period.
(2) If a player (kicker) is suspended for having an illegal kicking shoe, he must remain out of the game for one play, unless
there is a team time out, the two-minute warning, or the end of the period.