RULE 13 NON-PLAYER CONDUCT
SECTION 1 NON-PLAYER CONDUCT
ARTICLE 1. NON-PLAYER FOULS. There shall be no unsportsmanlike conduct by a substitute, coach, attendant, or any other
non-player (entitled to sit on a team’s bench) during any period or timeout (including between halves).
Notes:
(1) “Loud speaker” coaching from the sidelines is not permissible.
(2) A player may communicate with a coach provided the coach is in his prescribed area during dead ball periods.
(3) It is impermissible for the grounds crew or other team personnel to clear away snow for a Try kick, field goal, punt, or
kickoff.
ARTICLE 2. TEAM ATTENDANTS MAY ENTER FIELD DURING TIMEOUT. Either or both team attendants and their helpers
may enter the field to attend to their team during a team timeout by either team. No other non-player may come on the field
without the Referee’s permission, unless he is an incoming substitute (5-2-2).
During any team timeout, all playing rules continue in force. Representatives of either team are prohibited from entering the field
unless they are incoming substitutes, or team attendants or trainers entering to provide for the welfare of a player, and any
game-type activities are prohibited on the field. The head coach may enter the field to check on the welfare of a player who is
injured, but no assistant coach may enter the field.
ARTICLE 3. BENCH CREDENTIALS. With the exception of uniformed players eligible to participate in the game, all persons in
a team’s bench area must wear a visible credential clearly marked “BENCH.” For all NFL games—pre-season, regular season,
and postseason the home club will be issued a maximum of 27 credentials and the visiting club will be issued a maximum of 25
credentials for use in its bench area. Such credentials must be worn by coaches, players under contract to the applicable club
but ineligible to participate in the game, and team support personnel (trainers, doctors, equipment personnel). From time to time,
persons with game services credentials (e.g., oxygen technicians, ball crew) and authorized club personnel not regularly
assigned to the bench area may be in a team’s bench area for a brief period without bench credentials. Clubs are prohibited
from allowing into their bench areas any persons who are not officially affiliated with the club or otherwise serving a necessary
game day function.
ARTICLE 4. RESTRICTED AREAS. All team personnel must observe the zone restrictions applicable to the bench area and
the border rimming the playing field. The only persons permitted within the solid six-foot white border (1-1-2) while play is in
progress on the field are game officials. For reasons involving the safety of participating players whose actions may carry them
out of bounds, officials’ unobstructed coverage of the game, and spectators’ sightlines to the field, the border rules must be
observed by all coaches and players in the bench area. Violators are subject to penalty by the officials.
ARTICLE 5. MOVEMENT ON SIDELINES. Coaches and other non-participating team personnel (including uniformed players
not in the game at the time) are prohibited from moving laterally along the sidelines any further than the points that are 23 yards
from the middle of the bench area (i.e., 27-yard lines to left and right of bench areas when benches are placed on opposite sides
of the field). A head coach may move laterally down the sideline outside the bench area to call a team timeout or challenge an
on-field ruling when the ball is positioned outside the bench area. Lateral movement within the bench area must be behind the
solid six-foot white border.
ARTICLE 6. NON-BENCH AREAS. Clubs are prohibited from allowing into the non-bench areas of field level any persons who
have not been accredited to those locations by the home club’s public relations office for purposes related to news media
coverage, stadium operations, or pregame and halftime entertainment. The home club is responsible for keeping the field level
cleared of all unauthorized persons. Photographers and other personnel accredited for field-level work must not be permitted in
the end zones or any other part of the official playing field while play is in progress.
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct (illegal acts under Articles 1 through 6 above): Loss of 15 yards from team for
whose supposed benefit foul was made.
Enforcement is from:
(a) the succeeding spot if the ball is dead; or
(b) whatever spot the Referee, after consulting with the crew, deems equitable, if the ball was in play.
For a flagrant violation, the Referee may exclude the offender(s) from the playing field enclosure for the remainder of
the game.
ARTICLE 7. PALPABLY UNFAIR ACT (NON-PLAYER). A non-player shall not commit any act which is palpably unfair.
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct (a palpably unfair act, see 12-3-4). The Referee, after consulting with the crew,
shall make such ruling as he/she considers equitable (19-1-3).
ARTICLE 8. NON-PLAYER PERSONNEL. Non-player personnel of a club (e.g., management personnel, coaches, trainers,
equipment personnel) are prohibited from making unnecessary physical contact with or directing abusive, threatening, or
insulting language or gestures at opponents, game officials, or representatives of the League. Violations before or during the
game may also result in disqualification. Any violations at the game site on the day of the game, including postgame, may result
in discipline by the Commissioner.
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct: Loss of 15 yards. Enforcement is from:
(a) the succeeding spot if the ball is dead;
(b) the previous spot if the ball was in play; or
(c) whatever spot the Referee, after consulting with the crew, deems equitable. (palpably unfair act).